Chris Bache  0:00  
What is? What is a group mind, or collective consciousness? The way I have experienced patterns of collective mind, the primary ways in which context in which I've experienced them in my work has been working with students in the classroom, and there i i find that using Morphic, sheld Rupert Sheldrake work in Morphic field theory and the theory of formative causation, to understand some of the patterns that were emerging in the classroom were very helpful. Was very helpful. So that when a group of students come together, and they come together with a common intention, if you can strengthen that common intention, if you can strengthen it and attend to the quality of engagement, which injects our common work with an emotional intensity, not simply a passive intellectual intensity, which you often get in a, you know, introductory course at a university, Just a passive engagement, but if you can elicit active engagement and focus that engagement in meaningful exercises with in which the students have freedom of choice, and therefore the choices they make freely have greater power than the choices which are pushed upon them with time and with repetition, meeting not just once or twice, but meeting week after week, month after month, and in some cases, when students take multiple courses with you, year after year there, There seems to form a certain porosity, a certain transparency, so that students sometimes find themselves showing up in each other's dreams and synchronistic experiences begin to increase among students in the class, or often, as I described, in dark night, early dawn, a certain transparency would sometimes open between my mind and their and my students mind, so that they would find sometimes when I would just be reaching, you know, in the in the void, so to speak, reaching, for the example, to illustrate a particular point in the lecture, I would end up using as a what would be, to me, a randomly chosen example, something which would have drawn from the immediate life experience of one of the students in the classroom, in a way which, when they heard that woven into the lecture, would hit a nerve in their life that would trigger a reaction and engagement, even though I was not in any way myself conscious of making any paranormal or psychic contact. Yet there seems to be this process of flow, osmosis, exchange of information that takes place between the different parties in the room. At first, I thought of this in terms of some kind of psychic bridging taking place between my mind and their mind, right? But over time, I began to adopt a more collective representational model that this is, this is the emergence into into conscious expression of a literally, of an entity you can get when you can think of it as an entity, as a standing wave within larger currents of mind.

xcite83  3:39  
Say more about that? The standing wave? Yeah, we're just, well, I realize you have to use metaphor. Yeah, it's all weird for this, I

Chris Bache  3:48  
use metaphors sort of drawn out of fluid dynamics and chaos theory and non linear mathematics and Jung Ian psychology and Transpersonal theory, just using this assembly of metaphors to express a very simple observation, and that is that mind is an inherent quality of life that that characterizes every pattern of life. And if the pattern in the physical world is collective social, there will be corresponding patterns of mind in the domain of spirit. So where people gather regularly, repeatedly, with common intentionality, there is an accumulation of energy in the world of consciousness. So that I began to understand that classes have minds. Not only do classes have minds, but a course has a mind. And so the course is the cumulative learning effect in Rupert Sheldrake terms of all the learning of all the students who have ever taken this particular course with this particular professor the class. Mind is the most recent layer of the course mind, but the course mind is, in a sense, a dynamic, a truly psychically potent dynamic force which influences the patterns of learning of the present class of students who have just taken this course, taking this course this semester, that's the class. But they are influenced in their attempt to learn these ideas. They they are influenced from inside, so to speak, by the cumulative effect of all the students who have ever studied this material with this professor, which in my case, would be about 25 years

xcite83  5:42  
of students, fascinating. Do they enter at a higher level? Is that your experience? Yeah, basically,

Chris Bache  5:47  
find that every few years, every so many years, I have to redesign my entire course, because the students are starting at a higher level. They kind of get it faster. You know, when you develop a 15 week course, you have a certain agenda, and you you have two or three weeks to get to a particular point in the course, and then two or three weeks to get to another point. And sometimes you get into class the first week, and the students will signal you that they're already about three or four weeks ahead in the syllabus, just because they have a you don't have to persuade them of certain things that you used to have to persuade students. It's like they those ideas are more easily available to them. You can do it, give it to them in shorthand, and then you have to redesign the curriculum on the spot in order to kind of keep up with where they are. Now, there could be several things contributing to this. It could be improved pedagogical delivery. It could be cultural shifts that are taking place in the background, right? But I think one of the things that's happening is literally the learning which previous students have undertaken literally make it easier for subsequent students to pick up certain concept, this, these same concepts, and so they learn it much faster, and you can move through things much more quickly. And that's what Morphic field theory leads to

xcite83  7:12  
expect, right? How about individual mind? You know, would you say individual mind is a misnomer in some sense, that whatever our individual mind is is inherently an expression of something collective. Or, you know, because in our culture, everybody, there's such a particularly in America, there's such a strong emphasis on individualism, and I think there's a kind of conviction that, you know, I'm an individual, and people hear a word like group mind or something, and they just what, you know, it sounds terrifying, like the worst possible thing, because it sounds like the loss of the of their individuality. But I was, I mean, well, but isn't everybody lost? It? Isn't everybody in a group mind. And actually some, some of it's more pathological, you know, and some are more awake, but in some sense culture and, you know, every thought that we think is in some sense conditioned by larger collective events and forces. And you kind of get the general sense. So I'm just, what does that say about whatever we think our individual mind actually is?

Chris Bache  8:23  
Yeah, I think, by the way, you're absolutely right about our cultural paranoia about this group mind thing, and we can see it in the Star Trek series around the Borg, yeah, which is, if there is a group mind, then it has a de humanizing, a de individualizing effect, right? When actually it's just the opposite, that somehow the mystery is that what that evolution has learned found a way to evolve, not only whole groups, whole species, but has now found a way to evolve individuals within the species. That's how I connect reincarnation to evolution, so that this whole evolutionary trust which evolves groups upon groups upon groups now is evolving individuals within groups, and at the same time that individuality, while extremely precious and from an evolutionary perspective, extra ordinarily important. If you really look carefully at what that individuality is, you find it is an open system which reflects the entire cultural and psychological history of the species that we're talking about. I think that we have for several 1000 years, been on a journey which has been potentiating individuality.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
