Chris Bache  0:00  
I think that we have for several 1000 years, been on a journey which has been potentiating individuality and all the patriarchal religions, the whole masculine focus has been, as it were, a decided potentiation of the individual, even to the point of asserting the survival of the soul for the reward. You know, the soul lives forever and ever in heaven or hell based upon the quality of choices of the that the individual makes. It's an enormous potentiation of individuals, at the great cost, of course, of tearing the individual free of the matrix of life. Now we seem to be moving into a new direction, where we're recontextualizing the stupendous accomplishment of the fully empowered individual. We're recontextualizing that individual within the subtler matrix of what Buddhism sometimes called the Buddha womb, or the matrix consciousness, the Source consciousness, so that what was previously an unconscious relationship of embeddedness is now becoming a conscious relationship of embedded the ego can get frightened, because the ego thinking that its individuality requires separation and unchanging Self, and that's usually the two concepts that go along with self, is that the self has to be separate And it's unchanging. Neither of those are really true that you there is an actual higher form of individuality that emerges and is compatible with the condition of interpenetration, not separability, and the condition of perpetual change, not unchanging. And I think that's really what Buddhism wanted to deny when it went with the option of anata no self, what it was fundamentally denying was separability and unchanging Self. It rejected those in lieu of a concept of self which is dynamic and is interpenetrating, and that, I think, is where we are moving, evolutionary so that we have an individuality of a true self, reflective consciousness, potentiated over hundreds and 1000s of incarnations, increasingly potentiated self, directive, self, emergent, self, learning, self creating, but contextualized within a matrix that supports and is nourished by that process. It truly does support it. It is, it is the mother matrix which births this individual genius, and it is nourished by the learning of the individual genius. And that's a long way from the board. Yeah, absolutely, that's great. And I think that, you know, that's the larger issue behind, you know, the fundamental challenge of the 21st Century that we're pushing towards, I think, is towards a global consciousness, you know, global citizenship, which mediates between all the various divisions and nationalism and factions and religionism of the of history into into a much More complex, not boundaryless, but to some degree, boundaryless condition which doesn't suffocate individuality, but definitely recontextualizes it in a different with a different force.

xcite83  3:50  
Yeah, yeah, absolutely. What do you see as sort of the

xcite83  3:57  
ultimate applicability of this group wisdom or collective wisdom potential that's emerging. So what do you see that as

Chris Bache  4:07  
I have a lot of energy around that question, right? Because it has very far reaching implications from everything from Think Tank the phenomena think tanks and dynamics for augmenting creativity, for enhancing creativity, all the way to understanding of a new context for understanding some of the dynamics of social and cultural evolution And psycho spiritual evolution. So I think, for example, I think of an individual, a person, as, from a reincarnational perspective, as a living walking group, all right, and so they the more lifetimes a person has experienced, the more likely it is that they're going to. Have kind of more intelligence, more to show, more empathy, more understanding, more skills of various things. But in a sense, they are a living community of themselves. When you have a group of people come together, if, if you're coming together, either for spiritual purposes or for social discussion or for research purposes or think tank purposes. What this suggests is, if you can harmonize yourselves psychologically, socially and even physiologically, you can augment, you can stimulate and augment your own functioning by by augmenting a group consciousness, a group mind, which can have an uplifting and animating and creativity enhancing effect on the individual minds of those present. And this, I think, has significant implications for how we go about learning at a more pedestrian level, and how we go about creating new knowledge at a collective level. It also has profound ramifications for understanding some of the social dynamics involved if we have if we have a classroom context, and this would generalize out to the culture at large, which is highly divisive, then we don't have this kind of intelligence, enhancing empathy, enhancing effect of a unified field, drawing us into a higher state of sensitivity, a higher state of knowing if we do have a congealed group, if we have a good social process for congealing a group, then we actually stimulate, I believe, a more potent form of knowing, a more potent kind of discovery, because the group mind is like a more powerful transceiver that connects the individuals to the divine mind, so to speak, even to the point where we are clearly at a certain evolutionary impasse. We need to break through certain barriers in order to intellectual barriers, in order to solve certain major technological questions and that we have come to in physics, in in the sciences which are really important for environmental purposes, cold fusion, number of important unified Field Theory, I think we're looking at here, at a planet which, if the planet continues to be fragmented, politically, racially, gender, even fragmented in terms of in terms of speciesism, then that condition of collective fragmentation is preventing a potentiation of our individual genius. Where on the alternative, if we move towards greater integration, greater social cohesion, greater inclusiveness in medical care, for example, towards political democracy, so on, so forth, then that would have the cumulative effect of potential literally potentiating the performance of our individual minds and and therefore making it easier for us to Have the breakthroughs that would have profound implications in technology, as well as the humanities and the arts, but I'm thinking particularly of the sciences, where we have a sense that we're really up against some Real, major barriers for solving some of the technologies that we need to solve for to really get a grip on some of the environmental issues we're dealing with. So I think to understand the non local quality of mind has profound social implications once we begin to understand that how our mind functions, not only how comfortable it is with itself, but how creative it is, how imaginative it is, is not simply a function of the individual health, the health of my individual mind, but is a function of the health of our collective mind, then we have a vested interest in the health of our collective mind, and we have a vested interest in the health of a in a healthy society, in a healthy culture, in a healthy globe. To serve that end, cannot but have a rebounding effect, an uplifting effect on our individual well. Being directly, not indirectly, and not by virtue of not because of virtue, but directly because of Morphic resonance, because of the nature of mind itself. I.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
