Speaker 1  0:22  
You as I me. I can See

Speaker 2  0:39  
that I Forgot to be Me. No man

Speaker 2  1:40  
I know that life is meant for Living free, yay,

Speaker 1  1:47  
look inside and Find a place Your I am

Margaret Hiller  2:55  
Jennifer, please me and Y'all, she's moving back to the area. You

Margaret Hiller  3:08  
so welcome back. Welcome back to your neighborhood. We want to welcome everybody here today, so we are going to now stand again and sing, Rise up, you. And

Margaret Hiller  4:59  
follow. Oh, Oh, I have a church now First order of business after rise. Up is to turn off your cell phone. Please. Cell phones interfere with our sound system, and we're already having to deal with two poles that interfere with the sound system. So let's make it a little kinder and turn off our cell phone. Okay, let's all take a deep breath, and if it feels comfortable for you, close your eyes and let's allow ourselves to be fully present in this place that has been dedicated for A very long time to opening hearts, awakening minds. It's been dedicated for a long, long time to take us into the core of our being, where we know our magnificence. We know that we are the light of the world, where we can access our joy, our peace, our wisdom, our creativity, and our faith and our strength and our commitment to keep growing, keep deepening, keep awakening. So we give thanks for this place, all those who came before us, those who had the vision to establish such a movement called Unity. So today, we once again open our hearts and minds to feel our unity, our oneness with all of life, all of humankind, with the one presence known by many names. The service is turned over to spirit. And so it is, and so we let it be okay. Here we are. We're now going to do together the Lord's Prayer, translated from the Aramaic language of Jesus, all together, Please, father, mother, birther and the breath of all create a space inside of us and fill it with your presence. Let oneness now prevail. Your one desire then flows through ours as energy fills all forms, Give us this day our physical and spiritual nourishment and untangle the knots of error behind us. As we release others, do not let appearances make us forgetful of the source, but free us to act appropriately. From age to age through you flow the glorious harmonies of life. May these words be verbal statements through which our future grows. Let's take a deep breath every Sunday when we gather together like this and we say these words, I hope you can feel the power, the incredible presence of spirit that happens within us and around us when we say this in a conscious way, not wrote, not like just ho hum, but really connecting with the words. It's a powerful thing. Okay, for all of you who I don't know yet, and maybe you don't know me yet, my name is Margaret Miller. I'm privileged to serve as spiritual leader here at unity. And I'd also like to introduce our morning team. It takes a village to have a church service. Our ushers this morning are Carl O'Brien and Terry de Mario. They're back there on the bench. And our readers and ushers on video this morning is funny on Healy. Sound is Melody. And our music team Ryan on saxophone, you have the chair taking the rest after that. So and our singers this morning are Marley. And Ann and Lori and Mary, Lou Paula patty and Dave back there is Ozzy His flute and harmonica. Bill on the piano, Kevin on his guitar, Dan on drums, Tom on drums. And then that doesn't speak to your board of directors. Charles staff administrator, all the people, the volunteers, many, many people that it takes to create this experience. So okay, we're going to sing another song. Lily's going to help us with this one too. Want to tell you a little bit about Lily. Russ. Lily is originally from Georgetown, South Carolina. She's going

Margaret Hiller  11:00  
to be doing that West Coast thing that a lot of people here did at one time or another, and she sounds like she's going to be making her way back home. So we're glad about that. And she thinks she performs all over the place, doing plays and special events. And you also are with the agave International,

Speaker 3  11:24  
agape international spiritual center. But I'm not in the choir, but I've

Margaret Hiller  11:28  
been sitting there, and I speak there, and a lot of y'all know agape from Michael Beckwith work and Ricky buyers work, so welcome. Okay, y'all, we are going to sing another song. When we do, we're going to pass the duo Kansas is not our regular offering. This is for your loose change, and it goes to help folks in our community who need a little extra support from time to time. And we are going to stand when you're ready, and we're going to sing a song that we used to sing in the Pentecostal and charismatic church, and my other one peace like a river.

Speaker 1  12:20  
I have peace by river in My soul.

Speaker 1   12:37  
I've Got joy. Mountain

Speaker 1   13:02  
life, I'm like the ocean in my soul. Oh,

Margaret Hiller  13:54  
this morning, so I would like to invite all the children tall and less tall up here. Chris, would you hold my head? Yeah, I'm coming ready to take notes. I'm taking notes. Hey, everybody.

Margaret Hiller  14:16  
I want to know everybody's name. There's only one person up here whose name I know right now, and that's Elijah. And is it Caleb and is it Tristan? Yes, wow. Okay, so Caleb and Tristan and Elijah, sorry, and

Margaret Hiller  14:40  
our teachers this morning are Miss pan and Miss Rachel. Hey, Rachel, so there is a very special holiday coming up. Anybody know where it is Thanksgiving?

Speaker 1   14:52  
What happens on Thanksgiving? And it's all about love, that's what I want. Ah. Oh, you

Margaret Hiller  15:06  
know, we have a guest speaker today, but if we didn't, Thanksgiving is all about love. I'm so glad. And is it a time when we give thanks? What if? What do we give thanks for?

Margaret Hiller  15:32  
What is included, Caleb and everything? What do you think? What what do we have to be grateful for? Someone up closer if you want to say something in the microphone. We want to hear it now. What do we have to be grateful

Margaret Hiller  15:53  
for? What about your new hobby?

Margaret Hiller  15:59  
What about being able to go to school? Is there something that's in the world you can't go to

Margaret Hiller  16:12  
school? Do we give thanks for living near the beach? Yes, you know what I give thanks for? I give thanks for my fig trees and the birds that come to my bird feeders,

Speaker 1   16:27  
and I do things like life and for God,

Margaret Hiller  16:38  
so one of The things that we are here very, very grateful for is that you, you guys, come here to remind us that we are the light of the world, to remind us that you have a lot to teach us and remind us of we're really glad that you're here. That's one of the biggest things I'm grateful for today, that all of you are here because each one of us have a part in telling the wonderful story of our human family, waking up and realizing that we really can be love and kindness in the world. We can make a world that works for everybody. That's what we learn about when we come here, and you're a part of that. So let's all stand we're going to give thanks for you. I'm doing our blessing, and it is going to be up on the screen, and I'm going to ask you to turn towards all these people out here and put through with your hands. Remember love and blessing comes through our hands, our words, our eyes, our presence. So you're going to bless all of them out there, and they're going to bless you right back. Okay. We love

Speaker 1  18:00  
you, we bless you, we appreciate you, we behold Christ in

Speaker 4  18:05  
you, and we love you just the way you are.

Margaret Hiller  18:19  
Okay. No, we've got just a few announcements to begin with right now, and that is, our meditation class is fabulous. I am so grateful to be a part of this community and this kind of meditation class. So it will continue through December 10 and our contemplative service is Wednesday night at 530 and then we continue on into the peace chapel for the oneness blessing. And tonight, my sister Pam and I are going to be going to this I'll be one of the speakers, and any of you are welcome to go. It's the day of remembrance from Memorial for people who've been killed in hate crimes because of their sexual orientation. That's tonight, 7pm at dance Plaza. Now this is a really important thing. It's time to decorate our sanctuary for the holidays and Sue. Sue stand up. She's the first one to sign up for this beautiful project. We're going to have a Christmas tree back here, a giving tree for Hope House, the homeless kids in Myrtle Beach High School, and then we have a tree over here for Regency hospice. So if you would like to participate in creating the wonderful energy of the holidays here, then please see Sue. And Sue that sign up. She is on my desk. So if you want to sign up, see Sue after service. Okay? So. Please do and that's it.

Speaker 5  20:04  
There's one more. Margaret. I'm sorry I forgot to do a slide. We are starting a new book in our Wednesday Book Group, which is a fabulous group. So anybody who didn't want to come in the middle of the book a week from Wednesday, we're starting a new one.

Margaret Hiller  20:16  
Okay, so the new book will be Daring Greatly by Rene Brown, and so that will be happening probably a couple of Wednesdays from now. Okay, all right, so let's take a deep breath, and once again, we are reading this morning out of how to speak unity. If you didn't know how to speak unity, you can buy a book of different terms about unity, and one of the words that this author, Temple Hies defines is the word being. And so this is what Unity teaches. Are we human beings or human doings? In our culture, we have created a belief that levels of busyness equal levels of importance. We need a 12 step group for that to achieve this sense of importance, we often push ourselves past our natural limits. We were created as human beings rather than human doing let's all say that together, we were created as human beings rather than human

Unknown Speaker  21:29  
doings. It is

Margaret Hiller  21:30  
imperative that we remember to take time to simply be incorporating regular routines such as meditation or walks in nature rejuvenate our spirits and lower our stress. That's a good thing. What some of us were doing last Saturday at the main Earth spiritual center. We were walking in nature. Nature is free to us and allows us to connect with our inner stillness. Or the book of Psalms we read my Remember, be still and know I am so part of what we try to do here. In what we hope to do is to create a space of stillness and peace, even within the atmosphere of singing and teaching and listening and learning and encouraging one another. It's all about healing, and we give thanks for that. Okay, now we're going to read our unity statement of purpose. Please, all of us together. I am the consciousness of unity. Christ Church, a unified board and congregation, nurturing spiritual growth, inspiring creativity, sharing time, talents, treasures and expanding awareness of divine awesome and Lily, we invite you back to Do a song for us. Thank you Very much. You

Unknown Speaker  23:16  
Good morning, everybody, good

Speaker 3  23:24  
I just need to tell you briefly about this song. So the song that I'm getting ready to sing to you was a dream.

Speaker 3  23:33  
I was sleep, and Beyonce was singing this song in my dream. Wow. And I always have to give people space to laugh. There was a man, and he had moved, was very distraught. Apparently, something tragic had happened in his life, and he had moved into mental illness, and he began to walk around the middle of a water tower, and Beyonce lived on the second floor, and she could see the man in the water tower, and she looked out of her window and started singing this song to him. Then she invited the man into his house, to her house, and started stroking his hair and singing these words into his eyes. And I woke up, and I just kept singing the song. And so there will be a point in the time while I'm singing that I will ask you to look into somebody's eyes and say these words you

Speaker 2  24:47  
in your night and when your eyes start feeling. Take a breath.

Speaker 1  25:22  
In God. Comfort you.

Unknown Speaker  25:47  
It dreams

Unknown Speaker  25:52  
have died and no one knows how you feel

Unknown Speaker  26:00  
inside, where you can hide, You.

Unknown Speaker  26:40  
Oh, find Somebody to sing.

Speaker 2  27:00  
The party, your dreams have died and no one knows how You feel inside. Come to you can hide for

Margaret Hiller  27:42  
you. Moon, beautiful. Thank you. Okay, I would like to welcome everybody and make a special note of welcoming first time visitors. So if you're here for the first time, would you please, if you want to stand, give us your name and where you're visiting from? Yes, ma'am. Pat Chene, Washington, DC, welcome.

Margaret Hiller  28:39  
You're here with Lily from Georgetown, welcome Georgetown from California.

Margaret Hiller  28:58  
He let people in from California. Who else is here? And I'm here from Los Angeles,

Speaker 3  29:10  
California, but I was born in Georgetown, and this is my first time back since 1987 I've

Margaret Hiller  29:22  
been curious. To know if you see any changes. Yes. Ma'am. Cindy Perry, I live in Myrtles inlet. Welcome. I'm Jane, and I live in Myrtle Beach. Welcome. You. Okay, and anybody back who hasn't been here in a long, long time, and we might just want to make a special note that you're here. Yes, ma'am, welcome. Welcome back. I never my soul never left. Welcome. Welcome anybody else?

Speaker 6  30:03  
Yes, I'm Carl, Bella, Sarah. We just moved here from the Washington DC area, and I was here in September, so I'm back. Good. Welcome

Margaret Hiller  30:18  
anybody back row, bench? Anybody? Okay, going once, going twice, and here we are, welcome. Everybody. Okay, we are going to now read the Daily word. This is one of our oldest publications, and we have a beautiful affirmation up here this morning. And the word is comfort, right? You know, from the in the South, in Jacksonville, you say comfort. And then my voice teacher drilled it into my brain, comfort. And I see that you sing that word just like that. You sing your comfort song. God is my comfort and my refuge. Let's say that together, God is my comfort and my comfort and my refuge, beautiful and the daily word goes on to say, this life is full of joy and sorrow, but no condition is beyond the comfort of spirit, whatever my experience, even before I voice My prayer, the comfort I seek is available to me. I have what I need for any situation I ask and I receive. No request is too great or too small. Each one invites answers, abundance and comfort to arise within me. All that I need is available for me to claim in this very moment. Spirit in me is my comforter, inspiration and guidance to manifest what I need. Gratitude fills my heart as I know my needs are met. I am sheltered in the loving embrace of the Divine Presence. Peace fills me heart and soul. God is my comfort and my refuge. And from the book of Hebrews, we who have taken refuge might be strongly encouraged to seize the hope set before us and again our affirmation. God is my comfort and my refuge. Okay, now, for those of you, how many of you were here yesterday in the workshop? Look around there really a lot of people here yesterday. I heard as people were coming in this morning saying, this is one of the best workshops they've ever been to, not just here, but any of their workshop journeys. So thank you, Chris. Dr, Chris fish is family. He's a part of the neighborhood, partly because his mother in law is our own, Ann Marie, and our bookstore manager, and she first brought to us the word of Chris and his books. He comes to us after over 30 years of being a professor of religious studies philosopher teaching at Jonestown state, and he's former Director of Education with Institute of Noetic Sciences. Two of his books are down in the bookstore, and he brings to us wonderful wisdom and insight. So he is our speaker this morning, and for those of us who want to stay after service, he's going to do a brief Q and A so you can plan going to the bathroom real quick, getting some water, coming back upstairs after service. Okay, so this is the title of his talk today, and we are going to go into a meditation song, and then Chris is going to take over from there. Okay, alrighty. So let's all stay seated, and let's, let's dim the light you

Speaker 2  34:30  
I take the time. It takes me down the road so slowly, and I can't ask bring my thing and die, but as a folk, I surrender in the cry, Holy, Holy. Oh.

Speaker 2  35:10  
What a beautiful place I live my life to see your face. I live my life to so bright

Speaker 2  35:34  
I cannot see. Who would you hope who isn't? Who would you

Speaker 2  35:46  
hold? Who is me? Somebody? Help me. Help you, please. As I fall down on my knees and I cry, Holy, holy. Holy.

Unknown Speaker  36:19  
Holy to see your faith. Live my Life

Unknown Speaker  36:27  
to see your

Speaker 1  36:42  
face. Face, my

Unknown Speaker  37:05  
place

Unknown Speaker  37:18  
To see

Speaker 2  37:24  
Yo there you

Chris Bache  38:00  
Good morning, everybody. I've been told I have to remember to hold this mic close up to my face, so if I drop off, you just shoot your hand up and remind me it's a pleasure to be here with you. Today was Labor Day, I think Labor Day weekend when I was here last with you, it's nice to be back. So the topic today I like to talk with you about is no fear of death. And so begin with meditation. You.

Chris Bache  38:43  
It on the ground, nice and solid, feel a chair underneath you, close your eyes, settle into your breathing,

Chris Bache  38:58  
and in your mind's eye, see all of us in the room in one large circle, just transpose us into a circle.

Chris Bache  39:14  
Take your left hand and put it on the shoulder and in your mind's eye, put it on the shoulder of the person next to you, so that we're all together, touching each other, sharing touch, Sharing the energy of our lives.

Chris Bache  39:39  
Yield that circle and and

Chris Bache  39:50  
now bring to mind someone above who's died, and see them stand. Standing behind you

Chris Bache  40:05  
for more than one and let them put their hand on your shoulder, our hand and

Chris Bache  40:25  
we've all lost someone, so now we have two circles. Second circle is probably larger than the inner circle. So it.

Chris Bache  40:47  
Now they have also known death, love, separation from someone they love. So imagine, bring to mind in your mind's eye, someone that the person you loved also lost, and let them stand behind them in the third circle and put their hand touch the second circle you

Chris Bache  41:24  
wearing older clothes of their time in history, men and women, old and young and

Chris Bache  41:45  
it now that third generation, they were separated from someone in death. So we're going to let the process repeat itself and repeat itself, adding ring, touching our shoulders, touching their shoulders and touching each other until The ring goes back four at the time,

Chris Bache  42:22  
spreading out through history.

Chris Bache  42:30  
Feel the enormity of the community of those who are united in death and

Chris Bache  42:49  
now in your mind's eye, bring to Mind the next generation, the children in front of you.

Chris Bache  43:04  
And put your hand on their shoulder,

Chris Bache  43:18  
and then in your mind's eye, picture their children, and then their children, and again, put their hand on their shoulder, and then they put their hand on the Next Generation shoulder and on the next generation shoulder, those who have died and those who will

Chris Bache  43:58  
die Feel the enormity of this community, and we just started out from the people in this room,

Chris Bache  44:14  
and feel the naturalness of The coming and going of life, just the natural simplicity of the cycle of birth and death, sharing life experience and letting it go you.

Chris Bache  44:44  
Reaching back as far as we can imagine, reaching forward, as far as we can see, far as we can imagine, the community of life, the.

Chris Bache  45:03  
And feel in your heart your oneness with this community,

Chris Bache  45:14  
and relax into

Chris Bache  45:17  
the utter simplicity of this truth

Chris Bache  45:32  
okay, wiggle your fingers and toes, bring your awareness back into your body and back

Chris Bache  45:49  
everybody back. We didn't lose anybody.

Chris Bache  45:58  
So many things are changing the world around us, so many exciting developments, so many powerful transformative processes taking place in our life, and for me as an academic, one of the great transformative changes taking place in universities is around this topic of is there is around Death and around the research which is changing our relationship to death, because up until about 30 years ago, many people believed in life after death, and many people had faith in life after death, but not many people had knowledge, but they would Consider, you know, knowledge of that reality. And today, this is changing. Now we have so many areas of research which seem to be penetrating the veil of death, and so this pervasive terror which haunts the modern world view ever since the rise of science in the 17th, 18th, 19th century, with this vision that the physical world is the only world that's real, and it all came about through chance, screened by necessity, and there's no meaning to life. And when we die, when our brain dies, you know, our consciousness just disappears. What a horrible philosophy. But that is the orthodoxy that's taught in the university where I teach, and which is taught in universities around the world, and it is all outdated. Even though it's gospel, it's all passe, it's fading. So what I'd like to do is just give you a sample of 12 books that I think give us interesting insights into this larger cycle of life. Because if you're afraid of dying, you really don't know what life is about. If you're afraid of dying, you've got it all backwards. When really it's when you're born, that's when the hard work begins, but when you die, that's when recess come, that's when graduation takes place. So if you're afraid of graduation, then you don't know what you're doing. So let's get clear on what we're doing here. So today, I just wanted to talk about 12 books, and I've tried to identify the books which I've shared with my students through the years, which have meant the most to them around the topic of death in four areas. One, reincarnation research, cycle of life. Second, near death, Episode research, what it's like becoming third, life between life therapy, which is the fastest growing area in hypnotherapy, a subdivision of past life therapy and fourth psychedelic research. Now, I know you may be surprised to hear that one mentioned here, because we have a whole lot of negative conditioning about psychedelics. We all kind of went through the Reagan era and just say no, and we kind of forgot that for several 1000s of years, human beings have been gathering in sacred circles, using sacred memories, medicines to remember, help them remember who they are and recover their place in the universe. So that's the context for it. So I just want to give you three books, or pick three books in each of these areas. So, oh, okay, keeping an eye on the clock, here we go. Three books in reincarnation research, and I apologize for putting my own in the list. We already have it. Otherwise, other cells by Roger Wilber, who is a past lives therapist, is now. He just passed about a year and a half ago, and he's so he's in the bleacher seats. If I am asked, What's the best single book by one author who is a past lives therapist, person, I always say, who is Roger Wilber? It. He says he's a wonderful writer. He's good. He's got a good, solid grasp on the history of the tradition. He's a wonderful therapist. He takes you into the act of helping people recover their what I call their deep memory, helping people recover the deeper sense of who they are. Helping them remember who they were before they were born, helping them trace down the knots that they find in their present life. Where did those knots come from? Some of them come from their childhood. Some of them come from a previous life or a life before their most recent previous life. He just untangles it beautifully. And then Carl Bohm, who's a nurse who wasn't really interested in past lives therapy until her child started having night terrors. Her child started having fears come up in his dreams. And she got, like any good mother, she got involved in helping him untangle those dreams, and helping him uncover what was scaring him. And it turned out what was scaring him was the memory of a previous life that was beginning to bubble up inside his soul. And he helped her. He she helped him accept that memory, live it. And then the dreams, the bad dreams, stopped, and she got involved, and she began to put something up on the web, and hundreds and hundreds of people began to contact her. And she started working with children and with parents of children who basically have these memories bubbling up. And so she became kind of a significant writer and Plato in the field, and this is a wonderful book. It's filled with lots and lots of case histories of children remembering their former lives. And she talks to parents and helps them understand that this is a totally natural innocent thing, and how to help your child if your child starts to have these memories which are not all negative, sometimes they're very positive, ecstatic memories, helping the children integrate those memories into the larger because what we're doing is remembering our soul. That's the soul that's holding all of those lives and life cycles. Was the first book I wrote, which as an academic. This was my response to Ian Stevenson's work. His studies small children from all over the world, when they begin to talk, they remember their previous lives. And he's been able to document this I've been in I think Stevenson is the Charles Darwin of reincarnation theory, and this is my reflection on his research, bringing it forward, making it available, and then asking the question, so what if reincarnation is a fact of life? What are the RAM conclusions of living in a reincarnation universe? And I think they're profound RAM conclusions, because if you don't understand reincarnation, you don't understand what's happening. It's impossible to understand the logic of life, or the wisdom of life, or the intelligence of the Creator. If you think that we only live in life one time, that's like taking a Sherlock Holmes novel, pulling one chapter out of the middle of the novel, reading it, and trying to understand what's going on. You have to sort of think large. You have to learn to think in the perspective of God. If God would spend 13 point 7 billion years evolving a galaxy, why would God only invest 100 years in the soul? So reincarnation the cycle of life, but it dissolves the fear of dying when you understand that dying is followed by a rest and is followed by a return, which is followed by life, which is followed by death, which is followed by resting, and then is followed by return, this Wonderful cycle of life. What's it like to die? We know what it looks like on the outside. It's kind of unpleasant to look at from the outside, but what's it like to experience it on the inside? Well, let's ask people whose heart has stopped. Let's ask people whose brain waves went flat, and yet our medical technology pulled it back. Now we have millions and millions of people who have gone through this experience since the Korea War, where we began to develop trauma medicine. Here are my three favorite books in this area.

Chris Bache  54:34  
The first two were written by David ring, who was a professor at University of Connecticut all his professional life. He's one of the founders of the near death episode movement, founder of the Journal of thanontology. This isn't his first book heading toward omega. Is not his first book. It's his second book, his first book where he documented the phenomena of near death, near death episodes, the second book he's asking. It, what's the meaning of near death episodes? What are we supposed to learn about life from studying near death episodes? And he decided the best way to do this was to study people who had the deepest Near-Death Experience, because not all near death episodes are as deep. Some of them are kind of superficial, some are leading and some very, very deep. Well, he said, let's focus on the ones who went really, really deep, who not only got out of their body, went through the tunnel, not only saw the light, but went into the light, what he calls core envy ears. And he studies them in heading toward omega. And they're wonderful, wonderful personal accounts. It because he has collected from all over the world wonderful experiences people share their stories with Ken. And he's a he's a wonderful Archivist of their stories. And chapter three of Eddie toward Omega contains 13 people's experiences, very, very deep near death experiences, and it just touches your heart. It touches your soul. These people have gone into God, and it's clear that they're touching something profound. And it changed their life, it changed their mind, it changed their emotions, it changed their values. It changed their religion, change their their priorities, and even change their physiology. Having lessons from the light is Ken's last book on near death episode research. So it's kind of a at the end of the long, distinguished career studying these things. This is his last volume on it really pulls together the research he studies near death episodes of those who are blind from birth, who have a near death episode, and they can see even though they've been blind. And there is a chapter, chapter 13 at the end, where it's called returning to the source, where he has the deepest near death episodes and again, these are spiritual Odysseys which are just profound. I mean, they're they're just extra ordinary, and their story is your story. Their story is yours. And you can feel this, because when you read it, we've all die. We've been through this before, you know, and this is just remembering. It helps us remember our experience. It helps us connect with this larger landscape that life is part of. Now. What if this is just endorphin rush from extinguishing? What if this is really just fantasy? What is it? This is just kind of a wish fulfilling kind of exercise. Well, here, let's take a look at this last book pin womel, who's a Norwegian psychiatrist. There have been many studies by scientists of the near death episode experience. I think this is the best one. It's that if you really, if you have a really skeptical spouse, or you are a skeptical spouse, and you really want to look at the near death episode from a critical, scientific, philosophical perspective, read this book. It's just really good. It's hardcore analysis. And his conclusion is, every attempt to explain away these experiences fails. They fail to do justice to the reality experience. When you get into the detail of the cases, these things withstand critical scrutiny, just fine. Thank you very much. This is one I get my academic colleagues when they want to go, Boo Boo this and Boo Boo that I said, Okay, read this and then come back and talk to me now, just to throw a fourth one. And I couldn't help it, Proof of Heaven. You know, you know, even Alexander's work, we have this in the bookstore downstairs. Wonderful, wonderful account. There are numerous accounts of one individual who has a profound near death episode had guts to write it down, and took guts for this guy to write it down, because he's a neurosurgeon. Everybody knows. I mean, if the Hindus want to go to heaven when they die. That's fine, but Harvard and neurosurgeons do not go to heaven.

Chris Bache  59:30  
It's a very brave and courageous book. One more area, all right, trying to stay on schedule here,

Chris Bache  59:42  
life between life therapy. What is that? Well, here are the three books here, and these are wonderful. We have two over in the bookstore downstairs. Occurs to Michael Newton's work. I like Michael Newton's work a lot. If there were any one single. Little book I recommend to people who really want to address the nature of what happens when we die. I say start with Michael Luke, because I know if they read journey of the soul of souls, they're going to read destiny of souls. And the two of them really make up one volume work. Michael Luke was a past life therapist. He was doing past lives therapy was taking people into hypnotic regression, is healing, helping people heal by uncovering the deeper sources of their issues in this life. And one day, he gave an ambiguous instruction, and he found that his client not only remembered their previous life, but remembered what happened to them after they died in their previous life, they were able to remember the time between death and birth. And he said, Well, damn, that's amazing. And so he started taking people back into that life between life state and when he had taken 600 people. How long does it take you to develop cases like that? 600 people into that life, between life state. He wrote this first book, journey of souls, and he just describes what his clients described happening to them. And then later, a few years later, he wrote destiny of souls. He kind of thickens the plot a little bit, and people were very interested, and they began to come to Michael and therapists coming wanting to be trained. And eventually he created an institute where professionals can come to be trained in doing life between life therapy. And that's what's happening in the third book, memories of the afterlife, where you have therapists who have all been trained by Michael, who basically there's a short introduction explaining who they are and how they got in this work. And then there's a case history from their clients, of someone who remembers the time between life and this is the missing piece of life. Reason I called my book life cycles is because it life is a cycle, and right now, we're mostly paying attention to only one half of the cycle from birth to death. But if you don't understand what's happening from death to birth, you can't understand the whole cycle there. There is a logic to it, there is a progression, there's a de brief time when you die. There is the return to home, return to source time. And Michael emphasizes, it's a social time. There is a community in heaven, and there are community you are part of a soul cluster. He says, average number of souls he finds from his research is 15 souls in a cluster, and you It's like your class, your matriculation class. And no matter how many times you incarnate, no matter many hundreds or 1000s of times you incarnate, you always return to connect with these individuals. They're part of like your soul family. You go through life together, they don't always evolve at the same rate, because some are slow learners and some are fast learners, but you evolve together, and they're guides, and the guides have guides, and the guides guides have guides. And he describes in great detail the texture of this community, and what I love about Michael's work is the detail, the detail of people who die, who have lived a life so mean, so vengeful, so hateful, they've done so much harm, they've hurt so many people. What happens to them when they die? And he says, there's no help. We all go home, but some people have been so mangled in life that it takes special they take special care. Their energy has to be healed and realign before they can return to the community of heaven. He goes and there are specialists who work with them, engage them, intercept them, hold them, heal them, and help them find their way back home. There's just layer upon layer. Michael fills in some of the missing pieces. And if you know the spiritual literature, if you know the mystical literature of the great saints and sages from Eastern and Western mystical traditions, everything Michael is showing us is coherent and congruent with what the mystics have been telling us, the difference is that now we have hundreds and 1000s of people just like you and me who are going into this territory, instead of being simply monks and nuns and isolated monastic retreats going into this territory, the Secret Knowledge of these things is becoming public. It's becoming part of our public record, and it's becoming part of your students education. In college, if faculty want to take them there, and it's it changes lives. I've just seen so many students, it changes their lives, because once you understand what's going on, not only do you lose. Is your fear of death, but you you grab a deeper meaning to life. You begin to understand what your life is about, the challenges that are embedded. And by the way, Michael Newton describes the choices that we make in order to incarnate what happens. And he shows how people know what they're getting into before they're born, they make conscious choices to enter the life they're true they're entering. Now we might think, why would I choose a life like this? Why choose pain and suffering? Why choose handicap? Why choose early death? Why? Why choose these things? But you have to look at life from the perspective of the soul, not from the perspective of the ego. You have to look at the purpose of life from the perspective of the deep soul's agenda. And the soul's agenda is much larger than our personal agenda. Life is not about being comfortable. Life is about becoming more being more challenged, and that happens to be challenged. And lastly, psychedelic research, sacred medicine work in the in the indigenous traditions, they call these things, not hallucinogens, because that implies that the visions which these trigger are false, but sacred medicines, and their tradition is that the gods knew when human beings incarnated, they would forget. They would forget who we are and what's going on. And these medicines help us remember. They help us remember who we are and what the game of life is. Now I'm not talking about tripping, though tripping is interesting and fun. I'm talking about serious psycho therapeutic work and the van here, the foremost person is man, the fellow, the founder, one of the co founders of the Transpersonal psychology movement, along with Abraham Maslow, is a man named Stanislav Grof, and he's written about 1516, books by now. And this is the him here, one of the great thinkers of the Transpersonal psychology movement, and my favorite three books of his, particularly pertaining to the issue of death, what happens to us when we die? Are these three books. Now, a little warning, this is not exactly easy reading, just because this first book is LSD psychotherapy. This is a technical manual written for doctors and nurses and psychotherapists on the how to manage psychedelic therapy, how to manage a therapeutic session, low doses, high doses, counter indications, how to screen, managing the session, managing after the session. This is, this is not Tim and Lee. Lee. This is a different this is serious therapeutic work. This is the modern recovery of an ancient tradition after writing lesson psychotherapy and writing several books on the clinical implications for the implications of psychedelic research for psychology and theories of consciousness, and several intervening work and a book on their work in psychedelic therapy with the terminally ill, helping them adjust to the reality of their impending death. He wrote this book, The cosmic game. The cosmic game is basically a discussion of the philosophical and theological ramifications of psychedelic research. So it's the cosmology book, it's the it's the big picture. And Stan has a profound portrait of the big picture. And not surprisingly, once you understand it's it's nothing new. We've seen this before. We've seen it in the great mystical traditions of the world. We've seen it in the great meditation traditions of the world. Psychedelics is not the issue. Psychedelics is simply a method, one more method that humanity has used to tap into the very deep foundational core of our lives and the life of the universe. Meditation is a method. Transcendence is a method. Fasting and isolation is a method. Silence is a method. The careful, conscientious use of sacred medicines is a method for entering into this reality.

Chris Bache  1:09:38  
The third book, ultimate journey is specifically where Stan is addressing the issue of death. And he looks at death from a cross cultural perspective, from a historical perspective. He's drawing upon South American traditions, Native American traditions, Indian traditions and psychedelic. Research traditions, bringing it all together.

Chris Bache  1:10:02  
Is there any mention of Ayahuasca in any of those books?

Chris Bache  1:10:05  
Yes, there is. There is now Ayahuasca basically another psychedelic used. It's used in Brazil. It's legal in Brazil. The Brazilian government chose investigated the communities that were using Ayahuasca. They chose to keep Ayahuasca legal. Now, Ayahuasca is legal in this country. There is a community in Ashland and in Texas, in Houston that went took the right to the Supreme Court and won the right to use sacred medicine Ayahuasca in their church. So these are not renegades. These are not people who are pushing the outside, you know, just on the outside of society. These are trying, people who are trying to help society recover the powerful agents of self transformation that has historically been the role of the sacred substances. Can they be a youth abused? Yeah, they can. Were they? Yeah, they were, but if we have the wisdom to use them properly, they can be truly agents of Deep, sacred transformation. And I would just add the fourth book. My second book is in this lineage of dark night. Early on, I'm writing as a philosopher of religion, and I believe psychedelics are very important to the psychology of consciousness and understanding the psychology, you know, the depth of this human psyche, and this capacity to enter into the mind of the universe at large. So I'm kind of, I'm putting it out of the line. One of the things that happens in psychedelic therapy is just like in all the other areas, you lose your fear of death when you are able to tap into who you are underneath the body, who you are inside the very essence of the body and the wonderful universe that gave birth to you have brought you forward, well, then you just stop being afraid of dying. Dying is your best friend. Dying is graduation. Dying is the culmination of your life. It's part of the cycle of life. If you read those 12 books, if you were afraid of dying before, I don't think you're going to be afraid of dying now, and even if you weren't afraid of dying, you're going to really understand the life process much more deeply if you read these books. Thanks very much. You

Margaret Hiller  1:12:43  
Thank you. So what I hear you saying, Don't worry behind I hear you saying that there's much more to our world and to our lives, than simply getting more living life and leaving life, that there's an entire spectrum of life experience in the body and out of body, that we're Surrounded by a community of heaven. I love your term for that. The Bible says a great cloud of witnesses, like you said, your friends in the bleacher seats. Many of us here can feel the presence of our heavenly friends and loved ones. So I appreciate all the research, personal research and learning, being mentored with some of these great thinkers. So thank you for bringing these ideas to us. You're always welcome. So let's take a deep

Margaret Hiller  1:14:01  
breath. We're going to do our sacred have our sacred opportunity to give tithes and donations for the ongoing health and well being and continuing of work with this wonderful community. How many of you know you're part of an incredible, beautiful spiritual community here. And we have many communities, don't we, and some of our communities blend here. We have people have their other spiritual paths, other communities. They come here to unity, sometimes, all the time. So for our ongoing blessing, we receive our tithes and donations. I have my tithe check here. It's my great privilege to be a tither and to tithe on my paycheck that I am getting today, right?

Margaret Hiller  1:14:55  
Okay, so we have a blessing and a hand Buddha that goes with it every. Way, please. I am light flowing through me, blessing these gifts to radiate peace and our handful bless us With music. Thank you.

Margaret Hiller  1:15:19  
And away we go. Did Oh,

Chris Bache  1:16:00  
it a couple

Unknown Speaker  1:16:32  
minutes, three, Very nice for the song.

Chris Bache  1:16:42  
Two, you

Chris Bache  1:17:18  
Nothing. I mean,

Speaker 7  1:18:14  
I'll be you might have to leave The game. Up

Speaker 7  1:19:02  
For Don't worry, You. Don't worry. Wow.

Chris Bache  1:20:19  
Don't bring everybody down. Bring everybody down. Don't worry. Don't worry. Be happy.

Margaret Hiller  1:21:00  
I have heard the story, and I wonder if it's true that Bobby McCarry received that message from Mayor vara. Don't worry. Happy. There you go. Okay, y'all, let's bless our officers one more time with our hand Mudra. I am white, glowing through me. Let gifts to radiate peace. Can y'all see the smiles on their faces? Y'all want to bring your attention to this table over here, Lily has brought a few of her CDs. If you want to take the blessing of her music home, you can see her over here at this table after service,

Margaret Hiller  1:21:48  
one is blessing will be happening in here, in the Peace chapel, and tomorrow, I probably started this work. It started at the workshop yesterday. I continue to do my meditations for Susan. I'm ready for you. Me too. So tomorrow, 11 to one closer walk with God, Susan will be here supporting us to catch hold of some of that cheaper work that she brought back with her from India on this university. And we are also doing our annual unity art day. If you're going to get a table and you're going to be artist craftsperson at that event, you need to sign up downstairs on the lobby sign up sheet for that art day. Okay? And the attractions book is downstairs for sale, and I've already gotten my money back on it with the coupons. I love coupons. Okay? And next Sunday, we're doing again, a topic out of our meditation book from the meditation class, opening your heart, love, compassion and forgiveness. And I'll just share with you that we're going to jump off what Chris brought us. We're going to jump off that into some really great information that all came to me was a great download this morning, and my meditation, yes, okay, all right. And next week, there will be a possible repaving of this road out here in front of the church. They did it incorrectly. Imagine, so they're going to come and read pave and restrike. So if there's a problem parking out here next week, you can park behind the church. Yes, ma'am, I like to make it calm that moment. I did park this morning. I was told that an individual down the road is attempting to toe. Okay. So anyway, so there may be some parking issues next week, you can Carl pool. You can park in the back of the church. A few folks parked at old time pottery and walked over. It's not a long walk. Or tell us you need a ride from old time pottery, and we'll get some folks to do a little Carl, is that okay? Alright, here we go. Let's all stand and make our circle. Where did sue go?

Margaret Hiller  1:24:24  
Okay, everybody see this? I know that there are at least. I know there are at least four or five creative people who want to be a part of decorating the sanctuary for Christmas. I know you're out here in the circle and Sue, here's the sign up sheet. See Sue about helping decorate. December 1 is the first Sunday of Advaita, and that's when we want our trees done. Okay? Everybody got that? Okay, so let's say our prayer for protect. Question. This is James bill at Freeman wrote this, and we say it for ourselves and all those we're holding in our hearts. The light of God surrounds

Chris Bache  1:25:09  
us, the love of God unfolds us. The power of God protects us, the presence of God watches over us wherever we are, God is and all is done.

Margaret Hiller  1:25:21  
After you say it a couple 1000 times, you might memorize it correctly, all right? And now we do our peace song, We sing it like a prayer Song,

Chris Bache  1:26:00  
guide it all For

Chris Bache  1:26:22  
me, I

Chris Bache  1:26:42  
play. One

Margaret Hiller  1:26:54  
more thing, if you want to stay for a quick QA, we're going to meet back.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
