Chris Bache  0:01  
So some images, how do we imagine soul? How do I ever imagine this reincarnation? Well, one of my favorites is what happens in trees we are eating time, and the more time we eat, the more soul weight we put on trees. Do that get bigger and bigger and bigger and

Chris Bache  0:28  
we have other images nature does all these

Chris Bache  0:37  
things. We have these suggestive natural phenomenon where nature just kind of builds and builds and spirals on. But images are imagining the soul for flowers. And so when I'm with my students, I ask them to imagine that each one of those petals and each one of those pistols and stamens is an entire life. So this each one of those petals is 100 years. Each one of those little 1000s of Sagan in the center is 100 years of life. And the soul is the beautiful, magnificent integration of all of that experience into an identity that is bigger than anyone, but which honors everyone. And just as there are many, many different types of followers, we're not all becoming the same thing. Actually, we're becoming more and more different, more and more individualized. We're cutting ourselves. We're developing ourselves in different directions with different aptitudes. We have to, but we have to do something to imagine the soul that we are underneath something large, something magnificent and something beautiful. Many of you have seen Carl Jung's mandalas and these beautiful images that he would draw. Those to me, in some ways, are like images of the soul. They're not just images of the state of common of mind, but they're images of this deeper identity that's moving through so you ready to go to the next topic, yes, one very basic question, where are all this like as the population increases? Where are they coming from? Same question,

Chris Bache  2:42  
I answer all of these questions in life cycles because I wrote life cycles after I've been teaching this stuff for 10 years, and the students pretty much asked every question that you could possibly imagine. I try to, you know, get the answer. Here's way of thinking of it, the problem of the growth of the human species, and where those souls are coming from, is only a problem if we make two assumptions. One is that the number of souls is limited, it's finite, and that they're really very small. So in the beginning, there were maybe 60,000 human beings on the planet. If we assume that there were only 60,000 souls, and somehow we must be dividing them or doing something to get 7 billion souls. But here's a different way of thinking. My university was at one time we had about 3000 students. 50 years later, we have 13,000 students, if you never left campus, you saw the students coming and going semester by semester, you would see that they're more and more students. You might be asking yourself, where are they coming from? But of course, they're coming from the surrounding area, because this is a much, much bigger community than our than our campus. Likewise, we have no reason to think that there are only a small number of souls. There could be trillions and trillions of souls. There could be souls lined up waiting to get into the classroom that we're in right now. They cannot get on this planet until there is space available for them to get in. So every semester, there are some new freshmen and there are some graduating seniors. There's a matriculation, there's some humans who are leaving and some humans who are coming, but they're always more souls available and who are eager to be part of this exercise. Robert Monroe, who I talked about in dark, that early dawn, my book, second book, and we're not going to talk too much about today, but he's an interesting man. Went out of his body when he was 40 years old, traveled over the universe and wrote three books, autobiographical books describing what the book what the world looks like from someone who's been exploring it in the out of body state. He says, every one of us is here because somewhere in our travels, in the spiritual, non physical world, we came across a graduate of the earth school, somebody who had gone through this curriculum, and we were so blown away by the beauty and the quality of their energy that we track down how they got that quick, and we tracked them down to here, and we began the incarnational process so that We could become like what we saw, so massive, massive population. He says the majority of intelligent life in the universe is non physical. The majority is non physical. Do you have questions or hand up here, yes, yeah, I was born three times, three answers.

Speaker 1  6:00  
Born three pounds, three ounces. And I was wondering, would there be any reason? Because I, you know, I always said, well, smoking, you know, my mother like that smoky environment, like I feel like I'm getting out of here, you know, seven kind of thing. But any reason why

Unknown Speaker  6:19  
somebody would be born?

Speaker 2  6:22  
So I would be born so premature and low birth weight?

Chris Bache  6:26  
I don't, I can't, I don't know of any kind of formula that kind of gives us that, I think reincarnation. Of course, this doesn't answer all our questions. It just gives us a new context within which we can explore answers and once, and we're going once we get into the past lives therapy, where we have a context in which people have asked that question, why am I this way? Why did I Why was I born with this particular set of circumstances? And what we find is when you actually go into the details of their memory when you can help them remember the choices that they made before they were incarnated. There are reasons. There are reasons for everything. What that particular reason is behind that particular thing? I don't know, but we have context in which we can explore.

Chris Bache  7:22  
Yeah, that would have come up. Yeah, okay, all the all the various conditions. Why am I born this way? Why am I in this family? Why am I in this context? Why did I lose my legs in this accident? Why there is a deeper context? But we have to get into the soul in order to retrieve the memories that give us the information

Chris Bache  7:49  
we need, first here and then here.

Speaker 3  7:55  
Okay, this is Carl. I don't think this is well, it could be about reincarnation, but years ago, I heard concept of the term called walk ins, people that come and they're, they're from there, coming to watch us.

Speaker 4  8:17  
And I don't know if it's to do back or what,

Speaker 3  8:20  
but that has never left my mind. This isn't a book group that I was in years ago, and I've never forgotten that concept. Is it? Is it a concept that's out there? Do we know of this, of these people, or these souls called walking?

Chris Bache  8:38  
The idea here is that usually the way to get here is to be born. You know, you got to go through nine months of gestation and become, you know, go through diapers and go through adolescence in order to be an adult. In some instances, we have some cases where it is, it seems as if the personality of a person, of a person, a child or an adult, leads and a different personality is suddenly there. And this, these are sometimes called walk ins, that there's kind of a deal where they switch, where someone voluntarily leaves their incarnation, and someone voluntarily takes over the body so that they can be here without going through the whole gestational process. That's a complicated topic. Some people are skeptical about that interpretation of the walk in phenomenon. Other people are more supportive of this idea that you can have a step in or walk in, but the basic idea is that there's kind of an exchange taking place between spiritual beings and physical beings, or between embodied beings and distance. Embodied beings. Because if what I'm saying is true, we already are spiritual beings, right? You don't become a spiritual being when you die. We are spiritual being with our body. We are an embodied spiritual being. And then there are disembodied spiritual beings. So the normal cycle is what we've been talking about, but maybe there are some variations on

Speaker 3  10:26  
that interaction. So it is a phenomenon. Then you said the walking phenomena. So it's, it's that out there,

Chris Bache  10:35  
it is, it is out there, and it is discussed, and it does come up, and it's kind of a minor thread that does come up, I was just gonna

Audience 2  10:45  
ask reincarnation. I've believed in it forever, and it hasn't been popular in my church. So I kept very quiet, always to myself, but the question I've always had in my head was, when is

Unknown Speaker  11:00  
it over. Are there completed

Audience 2  11:02  
souls, so that you keep coming back, keep coming back, and you learn more and more and more. But are there ever, once in a while, I know what person you guys that I think myself

Unknown Speaker  11:16  
soul, but I'm not sure that

Chris Bache  11:19  
that's a large question, the classic way to think. See, we only began. We became self conscious about 35,000 years ago as a species, right? And until about 5000 years ago, when we began to develop the psycho technology to explore the deep unconscious, to really explore the nature of mind itself. We began meditating. And we began meditating for 4000 years ago. And when we began meditating, we first began to push deep into the psyche. We discovered the mother universe. We discovered Brahman. We discovered the soul. We discovered this beautiful, beautiful spiritual reality which is gestated the physical world. You know, the source of the Big Bang. And when we discovered it, our first reaction was, my God. This is magnificent. This is beautiful. This feels so good. This is home. This is where I want to be. I want to be in Myrtle Beach. Even though I like Boston, I want to be I want to be there. And so the religions that came into existence about 3000 years ago are all variations on an up and out cosmology. So we want to achieve breakthrough. We want to go home. So we want to be good, to achieve salvation, so we can go home. We want to become enlightened, so we can achieve moksha, so we can go home. So it's all kind of up and out and then, so if it's an up and out, then you have to what are the criteria? There must be some threshold that we must pass in order that we can get our ticket punched so we can get out of here. I understand all those systems, and by the way, Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity, Islam, Judaism, all of them fundamentally with a few variations among the most spiritually sophisticated elements, all of them are up and up cosmology. The purpose is to get up and away. That leaves a fundamental riddle unsolved, why the physical universe? Remember these pictures we were showing, why the physical universe? Why did the divine, or whatever you want to think of as this, what was before the Big Bang, when everything was in that reality. Why did that reality create the magnificent, physical universe that we are part of? Up and out? Cosmiclogies Leave that unexplained. It becomes a veil of tears. It becomes a challenge. It becomes an obstacle course, but it doesn't really explain what the divine was thinking when he created the physical universe. I think the eponopic cosmicologies are simply the first stage of human discovery. A more mature discovery takes place when we realize, when we wake up, when we begin to realize we are we can't we come from this reality. We are part of this reality. The physical world is an expression of this reality. The goal is not simply to return. The goal is to integrate that reality and this reality into conscious presence wherever we are. So the goal is to literally draw more of spiritual the mother universe into the daughter universe, that reality into this reality, so that these worlds become more integrated, so that eventually Heaven is a state of awareness. It's not a place you. Can be in heaven. On Earth, you can be in heaven. In the spiritual world, it's a state of awareness. It's not a place. Once we have a species which is able to have more conscious and continuous and unbroken rapport between spiritual reality and physical reality, then the evolutionary game changes, and we move into a new direction. But we're going to be doing this for another billion years. We're going to be doing it for 10s of billions of years, right? So it's as I think, when we die, we we get to go home, we get to be renewed. We get to be rejuvenated. We return to source. We all these wonderful things that we're about to look at happen. But the goal is not simply to get away from all. The goal is to become more to become more completely, a more magnificent manifestation of the creative process itself. So I'm distrustful of the criteria which have been established for up and up cosmiclogies. To me, that's just midway and the most sophisticated spiritual traditions recognize that. But the Western thinker, he's actually a Hindu thinker, who really drove this point home, and underscore this very powerfully in his teaching, is Sri Aurobindo. Sri Aurobindo was very critical the up and out cosmology. And he said not it's an incarnational theology. What we need is an incarnational presence, a greater incarnational presence, near death episode research, I bet if there's if any of you have looked at the literature for any of the four areas we're talking about today, most of you have probably looked at some of the near death episode literature. Isn't that a magnificent literature, because the stories are just phenomenal. Here are my four, my three favorite books for going into this literature. And I've taught this for years, and we all know Raymond Moody was the one who started it, you know, and got things going. One of my great heroes here is a man named Ken ring. He wrote his dissertation. He was at University of Connecticut, professor in the Psychology Department. He wrote his dissertation. His first book is called Life of death. This is his second book, Ted internal omega, and his third book on it is lessons from the light. Heading from heading toward omega is a little hard to find. It's out of print. Now you have to do a little digging in the libraries, and lessons from the light is still available, still in print. Ken is a size being, just a deliciously sweet human being. He is a very he's one of the founders of near death episode, the German near death episode, study of what was originally bad oncology. He's a good clinical clinician. He probably knows more about near death episode, research than any other single person alive today. His he's got file cabinets and file cabinets of cases, and he lets the people speak for themselves. So chapter three and heading toward omega, to me, is one of the most if there's a person who's really suffering from death in their life, and they are. They've lost someone. I'll zero box. CHAPTER THREE OF heading toward omega and give it to them is just, it's 13 accounts of people who have unusually deep near death episodes, and also in lessons from the light. You're going to get all sorts of research there. This is the last book he wrote. There's a chapter towards the end of it called returning to the source, and once again, he's distilled people's case histories, and he shares their case histories. There's also a chapter on near death episodes of the blind, because we find that some people who have been blind from birth or blinded shortly after they were born, when they have a near death episode, they can see. And that was kind of an anecdote that we couldn't document, but Ken, he documented it, and so he presents the evidence for this, and he also documents the long term changes in personality structure that happens to people who have unusually deep near the episodes. So he's been part of the second generation of scholars. We're not interested simply that whether this happens, we now know it. Happens. We've got millions of people. About 35% of the people who nearly die have conscious recall of their experience. What is an in depth Near-Death Experience? He differentiates five stages of Near-Death Experience, and not everybody has the same depth of experience some people may experience the first stage is the feeling of peace. Then there may be a stage of separation from the physical body, the tunnel, kind of phenomenon we go on to the confrontation, meeting of being of light.

Chris Bache  20:41  
So people for a variety of reasons, not everybody has the same deep experience. What Ken does in heading toward omega is he hypothesizes This is asking the question, not whether near death episodes occur. He's already written a book on that. He knows that they occur. He's asking the question, what does it mean? What is the meaning of the near death episode? And he hypothesizes that the most likely way to understand the meaning of this event is to study the people who have the deepest form of the experience. And he calls these core and the ears, they go right to the core. So it's not simply people who have separation from their body going into another reality, meeting the light. The fifth stage is to go into the light, to actually merge with that light, and to go deep into it. This is what he calls a core nd even, and that's where, I think, where people have the deepest homecoming experience, the deepest experience, and then they come back out of that experience. And those are the people who are often the most profoundly changed by that experience. And for the changes, you know, he runs the list of changes. They're not only changed by their their values change. They lose all fear. That's one of the most widespread phenomenon. They lose all fear of death. They become disinterested in material possessions. You know, that whole consumer culture just kind of falls away. It's just silly. They become more compassionate, they become more spiritually attuned, but their physiology actually has changed. Sometimes they can't be around electrical appliances and computers. They can't wear digital watches lights blow out around them. So there's something about going, in fact, to source, which seems to involve an immersion into a higher form of energy, which changes people physiologically as well as psychologically. Okay, so that he just very carefully lays them out layer by layer, and he documents all the phenomena that we're finding, he documents them piece by piece. Can I can I share the beauty of this is in the people's own experiences. So how about if I just read for you one of the cases that's in in Ken's book. You Yes,

Chris Bache  23:27  
this one is a case that comes from chapter 13 of lessons from the light. And do we have that? Yes, we do have

Unknown Speaker  23:37  
that book. They have such a great book

Chris Bache  23:42  
store. There's a woman named Virginia rivers, right? And I'm going to jump to the juicy part, and she has the usual she separates from her body, and he explains why she's having this episode, and she's traveling through the tunnel, and she's bowling through the universe, and then she comes to the end of this journey, and she says, galaxies are flying by her sensation, and she begins to receive knowledge. She says, quote, the farther forward I was propelled, the more knowledge I received. My mind felt like a sponge, growing and expanding in size with each addition, the knowledge came in single words and in whole idea blocks. I just seemed to be able to understand everything as if it were being soaked up or absorbed. I could feel my mind expanding and absorbing, and each new piece of information somehow seemed to belong. It was as if I had known already but forgotten or mislead it, as if it were waiting here for me to pick it up on my way back. She goes on a melody man could not possibly have composed, yet so totally familiar and in complete harmony with the very core of my being, as if it were the rhythm of my existence, the reason for my being. And then she encounters she goes into the ecstatic state of great peace, great love. She says, love poured into me from all the corners of the universe. And she eventually arrives at her end destination. And she What stands out for her again, is the experience of knowledge. She says, all at once, there was total and absolute awareness. There was not a question I could ask for which I did not already have the answer. Can you imagine, as I tell myself, the purpose of life is to get questions, because when you're with God, you want to be and you could have any answer to anything you wanted to know. What if you have just cheap, two bit questions? You want to have some good questions. Stir it up. Imagine anything you wanted to know you could know. I looked over to the presence. She's with this light presence I knew would be there. And thought, God, it was so simple. Why didn't I know that? Then she goes on, I'm skipping pieces. It was God, His love, His light, his very essence, the force of creation, emanating to the ends of all eternity, reaching out as a pulsing beacon of love to bring me home. She puts home in quotation marks. He told me many things of which I have little or no recollection. Now I remember only two things from all of that exchange. First, God told me that there were only two things we could bring back to it with us when we died, love and knowledge. So I was to learn as much about both as possible. Secondly, God told me I had to return. I could not stay. There was something I had yet to accomplish. I remember knowing at that moment what it was, but I have no recollection. Now, here's a little bit of a paradox, two things we can bring back, love and knowledge. However, she just made it very clear when she died, she went into a state of absolute knowledge. So we return to absolute knowledge. But one of the things that God wants us to do is bring back knowledge. What could we possibly bringing back that would be that would equal the knowledge that's waiting for us when we die? You see that paradox. That's a paradox really only if we think that the purpose of life is to go home, is to return. That's not the purpose. What if the purpose is to bring more and more knowledge into time and space. So the knowledge that we discover here we bring back, not to add to the knowledge that's there, but because we are integrating here the knowledge which is freely available there, the purpose is to bring more loving more knowledge here, which we bring back, because we're sowing there and here into one being.

Margaret Hiller  28:38  
Well, it's hard to talk about this stuff and not feel like it's an up and out cosmology, because even the way you're talking right now talks about we're going out there to bring it back here, when, in fact, like a mandala, isn't it flowing from and through us? I mean, we look into ourselves, and it's like looking into an atom. We expand back up. It's all happening here, right? Yes, okay,

Chris Bache  29:09  
yes. It's very hard to talk about it without lapsing into those old rabbits.

Margaret Hiller  29:15  
So we don't really bring something back, except in our memory, right? It's all where we have access to it right now, yes, so when we talk about bringing it back, we're bringing it back into memory or into consciousness, right?

Chris Bache  29:32  
I think it's a both, and I think it's a both, and I think that plainness, i

Chris Bache  29:49  
Yes, we don't really go anywhere when we die, but if we were to die right here, in some sense, we don't leave the room, but in another sense, we leave the room. Them. So it was a monk, Abraham Asante Club, an Augustinian monk in the 17th century, who said, He who dies before he dies does not die when he dies. Those who die before they die before they die do not die when they die. What does he mean by that? If there's a sense in which there's physical death, and then there's spiritual death, if we go through the spiritual death, which is to say, we drop away the ego, wake up to our deeper spiritual knowing, if we go through the Death-Rebirth process, it actually changes what happens to us when we die. And there is a it's more and more clear that we're really not going anywhere. We're just shifting our register, shifting registration. So I think the key is we're bringing more and more of it here. We're we're changing the conditions where we're changing the conditions within which life takes place, but we're not really going anywhere. So in that sense, we're not going anywhere. Robert Monroe says he's going out of his body in the early stages. You kind of have a sensation that you're traveling. You're going out. But then later that disappears. He says, You just kind of think and you're there. So it's not that you're going somewhere where there is a physical distance to travel. You're really just you're opening up to a depth of consciousness where that reality is here, right here, right now. And I think that speaks to what you're saying. It is all here, it's all right now, but we just keep ourselves shielded from it in some way, so we're just taking down barriers of our mind.

Speaker 5  31:57  
It sounds like that. That shape the Taurus, the Taurus and you expand out, but where you actually are back in the center.

Chris Bache  32:10  
Yeah, yeah. We keep bringing it all back into the into the center. Yes, here, and then here,

Speaker 1  32:19  
I lost my father. And the way that I understand that, or I think about that, and I think about him being with me still is, whenever a person walks out of a room, they leave behind there's something that essence or whatever that they've left behind, that print, that imprint that they were there. And that's the way that I stay in touch with my dad. Yeah, that makes sense,

Chris Bache  32:47  
it does. And this maybe allows us to address something else. My father died about 45 years ago. Now, according to Stevenson's data, he or his soul was probably incarnated again. And so one of the questions my students ask me is, I really want to see my dad again. I want to see the bones I love. What if I died and get up to heaven and they're already incarnated? They're not there anymore. They just left.

Chris Bache  33:31  
But actually, a couple of things help us understand this from a larger context. First of all, we don't incarnate all of our energy in every incarnation, the large majority of our souls, energy stays outside of time and space, even while part of it incarnates into time and space. So the way I would put it for your father and my father, that their soul, your father has now returned to his soul. So your father is now very much living a deeper life, a larger life, the life of the soul, even if that soul has sent out a distillation of threads into and started a new incarnation. When you die, you you meet your father's soul, and the face that your father's soul wears is the face that you are most familiar with. So where's the face of your father? But you are not just you, right? You are beginning to be your soul. So it may, in the first stage, it may be like you meeting your father or me meeting my father, but very quickly, it's your soul connecting, reconnecting with his soul. And that's a different that's a bigger enterprise, a larger enterprise, so that your father leaves a trace. All of our loved ones leave a trace in us and on the earth. It. But they are living presence. They continue to be a living presence in this larger world that we encounter when we die so and we're going to see Michael Newton is very clear, we only incarnate a fraction of our at this present time, a fraction of our souls energy. And we choose how much of our energy of the soul we incarnate into our present body. He says, If we incarnated our entire soul in our present body, we'd shortly blow all the circuits of our brain. We couldn't handle the energy. And that's why I think we picture great saints and sages like with this light coming off of them, because, literally, they are carrying more energy than an ordinary person.

Speaker 2  35:51  
Talking about a process where there is a God who, through this process of expansion, expansion

Speaker 6  35:58  
and compassion, is actually

Speaker 2  36:01  
making the souls all more like God. It's like this expansion, a bigger expansion and contraction. That's kind of so that we do bring heaven on earth in a new realm, or a new place, or whatever, and then would

Unknown Speaker  36:18  
go from there. Yeah. Yeah,

Chris Bache  36:24  
we're going to see when we get a little bit further along. Michael Newton, if you ask, where does the soul come from? Where do souls come from? And the answer seems to be, the soul is actually kind of teased out of God. The soul is like the sun's throwing out silver flares, and the soul is kind of the essence of the Divine is teased out, and it's actually incubated very carefully. There are beings whose sole job it is to catch and nourish that energy and to and to birth it help it birth into self awareness that it starts with the divine, but it's birth as an individual self awareness. But it's pure potential, it's unnaturalized potential. And then the system seems to be set up so that that self awareness begins this journey of self actualization. So it has all the potential of the Divine, but it's kind of like in potency, not in actualization, and it's actualized more and more, and it's almost as if this isn't quite the right image, but it's kind of like God is cloning herself, and God is just throwing out stars, and each one of us is is that the ancient Greek theologians called It logos for Monica, you know, the seeds of the Logos, the seeds of the Divine, and we're incubating that seed potential into deeper and deeper actualizations. Sooner or later, we develop enough that we remember who we are. We remember that our essence is the divine, and the essence of everything and every person we see around us is also the divine. Holy smokes, we're all part of the Divine. We're all differentiating and becoming more and more, and it's all taking place inside the divine. So the classic phrase is from God to God, always in God. So we come from God, we go back to God. Where are we now? We're in God. We never leave. We never left, except in our lack of understanding. So we are becoming more and more, in some sense, what we were in the beginning, but not exactly because we haven't actualized it. We haven't brought it into full conscious expression. And there's another one other last thing I want to mention is that we're going to, I'm going to get to Newton soon. We'll probably Newton's people very clearly suggest that the God of this universe is not necessarily the ultimate god. They talk about God's grandfather, this system, this entire physical universe, which we measure in light years, which is 6 million million miles, is one light year. You measure the universe in a yardstick of 6 million, million miles and 1000s, millions of light years across, billions of light years across. This entire universe is not the only universe. There are other universes. There are many universes, and there is kind of a. A being who is the generator and responsible for each universe, and none of those beings are the ultimate, ultimate being, okay? That kind of,

Chris Bache  40:22  
yeah. I'm getting ahead of myself. But when people do, when people remember what they were doing before they were born, they they experience divine presence, like people who have near death episodes, but they don't, they don't draw the conclusion. They don't use the concept, the concept of God, to describe it. Their vision is that the concept of God that we are born with and we kind of work with in our churches, is so inadequate to describe the reality that they don't want to use that language to describe the reality that they're confronting, and that this reality which is magnificent beyond measures, we saw from Virginia's experience that reality is not necessarily the end reality. It's just the magnificent reality. This is the generative intelligence of this system. So all of a sudden, we kind of, whoo, we're in a bigger universe than we even imagine. Question is, are we safe? What's going on? Are we are we part of an intelligent, meaningful exercise, or are we lost on this chaos? And I think we're getting more clearly this awareness that we are safe. First of all, there's nothing that can ever happen to us that will truly end our life, extinguish life. We're not hell, by the way. This disappears out of the system. The concept of Hell is is primitive beyond measure, and we're doing something that's creative and immensely satisfying in the long term. It may hurt the pinch in the short term, but taking us, if we're going someplace, we're going into a developmental process, it's just profound and satisfying that it's hard, and that's, I think that's more important for us, and to know the ultimate, ultimate, ultimate is to believe that this is meaningful, worthwhile exercise that we are part of here, and then back here, could

Speaker 2  42:36  
that be why We come back with knowledge so that we start at a higher level than we left, or at not starting all the way at the beginning again, so we come back with this knowledge, so that we can go further, or perhaps bring back our knowledge others.

Chris Bache  42:56  
I think so. And as long as we keep a flexible vision, like in college, we may have a student who decides to major in math and takes mathematics courses for several semesters and gets really develops a good ability in math, and then says, Well, I think I dropped that. I'm going to start being an artist. I'm going to try art for a while. Now, they may be a beginner artist, but that doesn't mean they're a beginner student. They're just beginning a new set of skills. So you really can never it's always a mistake to think that any level of proficiency in one set of skills is a reliable barometer of the measure of the soul that you're dealing with. Somebody can look like a beginner when they're not a beginner at soul level, they're just a beginner in a particular discipline. This is your first time to learn whatever you look like a beginner, but you may not be a beginner. Sooner or later, all of those skills, I think, will be integrated into one conscious presence. But the whole system is we work in stages. We're working in stages, one minute at a time. Last question before I'm going to read you one more near death episode, there was a question here. Somebody had their hand up. Yeah.

Speaker 2  44:17  
It's part of our development. I've noticed that if you read books, I like to read old books, like in the 40s and 50s, and even before, about what you're talking about. Now, there's a book called The unobstructed universe, and I think it was done in the 40s or 50s, and it was so hard to understand. I mean, I knew there were like little glimmers, really good stuff in there, but it was so the person expressing it, it was so hard. They had such trouble expressing, expressing it and writing and so hard to understand. But now, like the way you express things, it's just like in those few years. The ability to even express it has gone by leaps and bounds.

Chris Bache  45:04  
Yeah, and I think the more people understand a particular idea, it actually the collective psyche is also understanding that idea. And when enough people understand the idea, then it makes it easier for the next human being to understand that idea. So it gets easier and easier, and people who do past lives therapy, like when it removes told me when they were first doing hypnotic regression in past life therapy, you had to take people into very, very deep stages of trance before you can get to the level where they could remember their previous lives. But over the following years and decades, they found that they they didn't have to go so deep. It was like it was getting easier and easier to access those memories. Now, from Morphic field theory, you know, from Rupert Sheldrake vision, the more people acquire a particular capacity, they not only acquire it as an individual, but the species is acquiring it. So if remembering our former lives is a capacity, the first people who remember their previous lives, they may have to go very, very hard, but very, very deep, but it gets easier. The more people do it, the easier it gets. So always, we are always standing on the shoulders of the men and women who went before and we are then becoming the shoulders that our children and grandchildren will stand on. Isn't it exciting unity 200 years from now?

Unknown Speaker  46:34  
But when you think about it, they will be us.

Chris Bache  46:51  
Yeah, let me read you one more dear episode here, these things are just so beautiful.

Chris Bache  47:01  
This comes from heading toward omega, and it's the experience of a woman named Carl Parrish, Hanna. Carl, and she, usual, I skip the early part. She's traveling to the university Tolle of light. And then she gets to, she gets to the combination part. She says, by my side, there was a being with a magnificent presence. I could not see an exact form, but instead a radiation of light that lit up everything about me and spoke with the voice that held the deepest tenderness one can ever imagine as this loving yet powerful being spoke to me. I understood vast beings, much beyond my ability to explain. I understood life and death, and instantly any fear I had ended there was a totality, a completeness in the realization that I could continue to experience and that there was absolutely no reason to continue my frantic struggle to exist. For what seemed to be endless time, I experienced this presence, this light, being pure, powerful, all expansive, was without a form. And it could be said that great waves of awareness flowed into me and into my mind as I responded to these revelations, I knew them to be so. Of course, it didn't matter if one lived or died, it was all so clear. There was a complete trust and greater understanding of what these words meant. It seemed whole truths reveal themselves to me, ways of thought, ideas greater and purer than I have ever tried to figure out came to me thoughts clear and without effort revealed themselves in total wholeness, although not in logical sequence. I of course, being in that magnificent presence, understood it all. I realized that consciousness is life we will live in and through much, but this consciousness we know that is behind our personality will continue. I knew that the purpose of life does not depend on me. It has its own purpose. I realized that the flow of it will continue, even as I will continue. New serenity entered my being as this occurred, an intensity of feeling rushed through me, as if that light that's as if the light that surrounded that being was bathing me, penetrating every part of me as I absorb the energy I sense what I can only do. Scribe as bliss, that is such a little word, but the feeling was dynamic, rolling, magnificent, expanding, ecstatic bliss. It whirled through me, around me, and entering my chest flowed through me, and I was immersed in love and awareness for ineffable time.

Margaret Hiller  50:31  
That's the kind of thing we can read our beloveds when they're in their passing time. So what a gift

Chris Bache  50:39  
to be afraid of dying is to have everything turned upside down. Dying, I tell my kids all the time, it's a great life, and at the end you get to die. There are some cultures that warm Earth because birth is when the work begins. Birth is when you begin the class, the session. Dying is returning home. Dying is graduation. Dying is recess is coming in joy. I usually don't share

Unknown Speaker  51:15  
this, and certainly didn't 30 years ago, if

Audience 2  51:18  
you would understand them, but 30 years ago, I must die, and I had the

Unknown Speaker  51:26  
Near-Death Experience, and

Audience 2  51:30  
I went through those stages of calm and everything, and I went up to the to the ceiling, looking down at my body, which was in so much pain, everybody working on me down there, you know, and the calm and the everything that was there and the light was behind me. I didn't get to go through the light, and I remember, and I felt bad about it ever since I was so and I had two small children, there's certainly a reason for me to stay on this earth. But what I was feeling at that time was so wonderful, and the light was behind me. I wasn't going toward the light, but it was pulling me, and all of a sudden, bam, I was right back in my body with all of that pain and everything, I was so angry ever since, because I certainly came back with a whole new concept and even energy spiritual, you know. But still, I remember being I was ready to go.

Chris Bache  52:40  
It was even with children. There never

Audience 2  52:45  
entered my mind when I was there. Though it wasn't like, oh, I have responsibility. I need to go back. There was nothing of that. It was like complete serenity,

Speaker 6  52:57  
complete bliss. And I was going home, yeah, and then all of a sudden,

Audience 2  53:07  
body, I just, that's first thing. I remember just being because I had been in shock, and I just remember being

Chris Bache  53:13  
angry that I was and that's and other people would have shared that experience, because people, when they come back, sometimes they're angry. They get angry the doctors, why did you bring me back? And it takes them a long time, some time, to adjust to life back on Earth, because once you touch infinity. I mean, really, he wants to be a young stone. Yeah. Ah,

Chris Bache  53:47  
before you were born, you were in that ecstatic space. You were in ecstasy. You were in the light. You were with the divine. You were in your soul, all the joy that pulls you so instinctively, there you were there, and then you made a series of choices where you voluntarily left it in order to come here. And

Unknown Speaker  54:13  
that's what made you scrub.

Chris Bache  54:18  
There must have been some great purpose for you to come here, to leave that to leave that joy, there must be great purpose that draws us to here. And some, some mystics, Juliana of Norwich. You know, she's a 16th century, I think, Catholic saint, wonderful woman. She had a vision on her deathbed, she had a Near-Death Experience, and she spent the rest of her life meditating on this vision and and she unpacked it in this book that eventually called revelations of love, divine love. And she says, she says she rejected the concept of original sin. She said, that's just not true. God is not angry of us, and we're not sinful, we're not bad. She says, God asks us to come, and God knew we were going to it's like you send out your beloved son on a journey, or your daughter, and they're going to they fall into a ditch and they get stuck in the bottom of the ditch and they can't get out. And God knew we were going to get stuck. We knew we were going to forget. We knew we were going to get stupid. The malls were going to be our favorite places to go.

Chris Bache  55:38  
But we love God so much. We went where she asked us to go, and when we when we die, we remember why. When we die, we touch back into the foundation, and we are restored. We debrief, but then sooner or later, it's time to come into it again. It's time to grow, because we're constantly learning and expanding and becoming more. And the reason we're learning and expanding and becoming more is because our nature is God, and this is what God is doing. This is part of the fabric of existence.

Speaker 5  56:15  
Yes, it's amazing to me that we can have these I hadn't Near-Death Experience years ago. It did change my life. What's so amazing to me is that we can have these miraculous experiences, and I've also had experiences in meditation that are very similar to some of these. So you have these miracles, and then two days later you're pissed off in the traffic jam. No wonder we forget whole lifetime, then you can have this miraculous understanding and know that there's nothing to be afraid of, and then run up and lock your doors. That's that stupid thing.

Chris Bache  56:59  
Time and space it's tricky, isn't it? I mean, it's really, it's so dense here, it's incredibly dense. And it kind of the bail comes down, and we feel like we're, you know, we're trapped again. We're involved in things. And a weight lifter becomes strong by putting more weight on the bar. The weight lifter doesn't complain about the weight in the bar because the weight allows them develop the muscles. Time and space is the weight on the bar. It's allowing us to develop muscles faster than we would develop if we stayed in heaven. So, but it's hard. It's hard being here. It's tricky being here. There's more ways, kind of we feel like there's more ways to go wrong than the article right? It's challenging to go here. Thank God for unity. Thank God there's a place where people can go and put these pieces together and and find their way back to this deep sanity, which allows them to live not only with a measure of dignity but your enthusiasm to actually consciously embrace the challenge of being human, instead of feeling like you're being punished, or you're exiled, or this all this nonsense, we're exiled from paradise. No, I mean, you can understand where that came from, but no, that's just not right. I mean, you know, God is right here. God wouldn't send us here. The Goddess wouldn't send us here without giving us all means available to make it work. Now it's time to take a break for lunch before we go

Margaret Hiller  58:37  
down, before we go downstairs for this incredible lunch that Miss Charlene has put together for us. Some of you are clamoring for us to receive the donation, and if you're making.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
