Margaret Hiller  0:00  
Okay, okay, Alrighty, welcome, welcome, welcome, and for those of you who don't know me, I'm Margaret Hill around spiritual leader here at Unity Christ Church. Thank you. Be guided to here. We are so welcome to unity, and we are so happy and grateful that Chris Bache has returned to visit with us. I know it's not just because Ann Marie, our member and bookstore manager, happens to be his mother in law. We know he's here because He loves us. And actually, I have it on good authority from Chris that he really does appreciate this group. And so Chris, wow. He comes to us with over 30 years of being a professor in luminous studies and also a former Director of Education at Institute of Noetic Sciences. He's written several books, and most importantly, he's been here before, and we all so respect and honor you and your presentation style and presence and all that you bring to us. So thank you for being here again. Chris fish, thank you. Good morning,

Chris Bache  1:21  
everybody. Morning. Everybody. How nice to be back with you again.

Margaret Hiller  1:24  
Now, let me just ask Ross about, do we need a mic? Because we can, like, Yeah,

Chris Bache  1:29  
good question. Do we? Are we? Okay, noise wise, how we doing? Everybody able to hear? Don't be shy about that's a good voice. Anything lower than that, anything more

Margaret Hiller  1:40  
than I can get the mic, and that may help. Okay, okay,

Chris Bache  1:50  
I'd love to talk about the things we're going to talk about today, and I just got oodles of information to share with you, but the most important thing I'm going to be trying to do is interest you in reading some of these books, some of them you will already have read. Some of them will be new to you, but the richness is actually going into the material and reading it yourself firsthand, because I'm just going to be summarizing the categories and touching on some of the things that I won't be able to take you to the richness of it, which is really people's lives, experiences, the actual experiences. I teach at a state university in Ohio, and you know, the religion of the university today is a secular university. Today is secular humanism. It's material reductionism, it's flatland or metaphysics, where the conviction is that the physical world is the only world that's real, and anything, any talk of a world behind the physical world is just fanciful speculation. But even in a more progressive environment, there is still this, this perception that my students come in with all the time, when we start to look at this information, that we really can't know what happens to us when we die. We can speculate it, think about it. We can have theories about it, and some of them are suggestive, but we really can't know what happens to us when we die? That's beyond the pale of knowledge. And I think up until about 30 years ago, that was probably true. That probably was the case, maybe in Western culture. But I don't think it's true today. Today, I think we have the emergence of disciplines, new disciplines that have sufficient momentum behind them and a convergence of their data that is really taking the question of what happens to us when we die and placing it in a new context, an empirical context, and We really are beginning to get sustained insight.

Unknown Speaker  4:03  
Okay, all right, go ahead and start talking.

Chris Bache  4:05  
We all you haven't worked the volume, sustained insight into the

Chris Bache  4:14  
larger cycle of life, the larger cycle of life, the larger patterns of life, only part of which is what happens to us when we die. It's not just what happens to us when we die, it's what it's that cycle of life where we keep coming back and we're going to go into where we go when we die, and where we're coming from when we're born, and what the larger pattern is. So today is just a sort of a an introduction to four areas of research, which, if you the more you read in this material, the more it just your any residual fear of death just evaporates. And I've been watching students taking them into this material for decades, and I've watched their lives be changed because they be the more. More they understand, the less they fear, and then more they can consciously participate in the life process, rather than feeling like a victim or feeling like we really just don't know. We're just kind of hopelessly trapped in our ignorance here. So the areas we're going to look at today four areas of research, each one of which is a whole course unto itself.

Chris Bache  5:29  
Four Areas reincarnation research topic I talked about when I was here

Margaret Hiller  5:36  
last time. Oh Chris, hold it up next there. We go.

Unknown Speaker  5:56  
Figure out for the library, why

Chris Bache  6:01  
near death episode. Research, people nearly die, or they die and they come back life between life therapy, which is a sort of a subdivision of past lives therapy, and it's very specific kind of track within the past lives therapy, tradition and psychedelic research, the research which our government has made illegal in 1969 but before they did that, it had about 1500 years of history among Native American traditions, among Brazilian traditions. So there is a there is a massive amount of data that the anthropologists are cultivating, and now psychedelic research is starting, is resuming again. There's a whole new generation of young scholars that are beginning, a whole new wave of psychedelic research now, each of these areas contributes a certain piece to the discussion. I think you'll see that there's an overlap in the material, but each of them bring out a certain set of concepts, which puts new pieces of the puzzle on the table in reincarnation research. Here, the concept is the larger cycle of life. It's it's not just that we come back, but it is the larger vision of the soul that is implicit in the vision of reincarnation. It really has to do with how old are we and what kind of time frame are we looking at to understand life. It's really a matter of the fundamental understanding of how life works at the nuts and bolts level, in the second category, the Near-Death Experience category. Well, there's a lot to learn here, but the main thing first we're looking at is what's it actually like to die from we know what it's like from the physical side. You know what that exit looks like, but what's it like in the interior side? What is the experience of life like? Of the experience of death like? Because if reincarnation is true, then there's a revolving door, there's a birth is the entrance, death is the exit. But what's it really like to die? And at least we get some insight by looking at people who have gotten closer than you and I have, and then who have been pulled back by technology and sampling their experience. And we're looking at now millions and millions of human beings who have had these experiences, and we've been looking at them now for 30 years, 35 years, and so we're getting a lot of good empirical studies with them in the life between life therapy. Here I say we're looking at the community of heaven. Here we're getting some insights into the actual structure of the social world that we enter when we what are we doing in between death and birth? How are we spending our time? Who are we spending it with? What's the structure of reality that we enter? And we're going to see Michael Newton's work in life between life therapy is giving us insights into this reality, and it turns out those insights are very congruent with the insights of our mystical traditions and deep spiritual traditions, the Tibetan embargo, the Book of the Dead, and the studies of the Bardo. There's actually a convergence here between ancient and modern. And lastly, psychedelic research. We're looking at Sacred medicine, journey, work, sacred medicines with cultures much wiser than ours have long known that there are certain substances, certain chemicals, which are. Sacred. They actually. They amplify consciousness, they expand consciousness. They give us the opportunity to enter into a conscious communion with the larger world. And these go back 1000s of years, and this is a lineage which is very important to me, because my whole professional life has been spent really exploring this particular territory. Even given the legality in the legal issues, makes it kind of complicated, but it allows, it allows us to push the philosophical questions into new territory. And I think you'll see that there is a positive correlation between what we're learning from the sacred medicine work and what we're learning from these other non psychedelic areas of investigation. So the primary thing I'm going to be doing today is going to be taking you into a recommending for your consideration 12 books. I've tried. I've asked myself, What are the three most important books, the books that would be the most enlightening for you to read in each of these four categories, and I've thrown in a couple more around the edges, just because I couldn't stand it. I've tried to boil it down to three books, which you can pick up and work your way through and understand them and go into the material. So I'm going to lab here. I'm supposed to tell you the schedule. We're going to go until about about an hour from now, about 1115 take a short break, 10 minute break, we'll come back, we'll work until about 1230 take lunch, and then we'll not let lunch run too long, and then we'll come back and run the afternoon until three o'clock. Okay? And if you need to step out for the bathroom all the way, just step up. And I get excited. So if I get overtime and I lose track of time, someone in the time binder, raise your hand. Let me know where we are, and questions are appropriate all the time, anytime along the way, interrupt me, because that's when it gets the best. Okay? Ready to go? Okay, we'll begin with reincarnation research. Now, the first two books I'm going to tell you are not part of the three, but I couldn't resist not putting the first two is this book by Ian Stevenson, who just died recently, so he's watching from the bleacher seats now.

Margaret Hiller  12:50  
And Chris, I understand you have the book list for us as a handout this okay,

Chris Bache  13:04  
just going to make your work easier. I don't want to write down so much. Every good book I mentioned today is on this list, and so you can just check off the ones you want to read and bring the list. She can order them for you, and some of them we have in our books tour already. Ian Stevenson, university Virginia has published over a dozen books on reincarnation research, and he specializes in studying small children two to three years old, who have spontaneous memories of what appeared to be a former life, and, of course, documenting those memories, verifying those memories, excluding the situations where the children might have learned that information through natural means, not through actual memory of a previous existence. All those things are where the research comes in. But Stevenson is a meticulous researcher, he has documented hundreds of cases of children from around the world who, just when they start to speak when they're two, three years old, they just matter of factly bring up their former life and, you know, unfinished business, people, they remember, people they want to talk to. And we can, we've gotten these children back into the family of the original personality, and they can identify people, they can name names, they can they can recall details of family history. There's infinite details of the houses they live in, of things that happen on a particular event. It's just extra ordinarily important body of knowledge. And Stevenson, I think, is the Charles Darwin of reincarnation theory, really, as reincarnation is an old idea, like re evolution is an old idea, but Darwin gave us empirical facts to assess that idea, and Stevenson has given us empirical. Facts to look at reincarnation. Yes, just how did

Unknown Speaker  15:05  
he get into that? How did he get

Chris Bache  15:07  
started? You know, he was a traditional academic at University of Virginia. He's in the medical school there. He wrote a personality textbook. He was very traditional stuff. And then he started encountering some of these cases. And he had, I think he had, he's in the hands and endowed chair head, an endowed chair. And I think it's Xerox money or coke money was behind the chair. And he just, he put his whole reputation online. Just found this fascinating subject. He recognized that, you know, this is true, that's just incredibly important for us. And he just, he just dug in. He started doing his international travels.

Audience 2  15:52  
And there was a psychiatrist, I forget his name, he's quite big. He's on Oprah a few weeks ago, and he talked about how he was treating somebody, and she started to tell the story of her past life, and then he got into that.

Chris Bache  16:07  
Brian Weiss, maybe, yeah. Brian Weiss, yeah. He's one of the therapists. Now he is not a therapist. I'm going to show you a therapist in just a minute, but he Ian Stevenson, is not a therapist. He considers himself a researcher. He's a psychiatrist. Actually, he doesn't do therapy, and he doesn't trust hypnosis as a source of data. He only wants to work with people who have spontaneous memories of what appear to be a former life. Okay, a therapist and a woman who I think is one of the great danes she also is now beside Stevenson on the bleacher seat. She just died a few years ago, Winifred Lucas, and among the people like Ryan Weiss and other past lives therapists who were on the talk show circuit. They probably were trained by Winifred Lucas at some time in their past. She is one of the older generation. Got into this work, very, very early, German educated. She published a two volume book regression therapy, which is just they wanted to take past lives therapy and establish a clinical protocol for training past lives therapists. They wanted to standardize the discipline. And this two volume book is written. It's, it's an anthology, two anthologies. It's the who's who of people doing past lives therapy up to the time when it was published in the mid 1990s and it's just a wonderful textbook. Now, both of these books, they're aimed for professionals. I mean, they're really kind of aimed. They're not easy reading. They're not for popular press. They were never intended for the popular press. They're very manageable. Stevenson is a bit of a bore to read. When I've taken my students into his books, they say, I'm really glad I read it. I'm never going to read it again, because he thinks like a lawyer. He writes like a lawyer, but that's exactly the scientist you want doing this type of work between the two of them is just extra ordinarily. It moves the whole discussion of reincarnation onto a much larger landscape in every one of these cases where people have spoken the past life, what happened with them that they can identify with that and say, that was my life that's I've often wondered about that. Or are they picking up something like Ireland to the Akashic field, all that energy that's always out there? Are people tapping into that? Or is it actually a form of reincarnation? You know, some of you know the work of urban Laszlo and urban at one point, came up with it because he was working on the Akashic field and really trying to establish a dialog between quantum theory and field theory and ancient theory the Akashic field, the mind of the, you know, the memory of the human species. And he proposed that what people were doing when they tapped into what appeared to be a former life, they were actually tapping into the Akashic field that they weren't really remembering their life. They were remembering somebody's life because they were tapping into the collective psyche. And he published this at the end of one of his books, and I immediately jumped up and said, No, no, urban, you're wrong. And so he and I got the conversation, and he said, write it up. And so I wrote it up. And so he published it. And there's a dialog between urban and I, and I argued that that's an inadequate description of the. Actual fact, when you get into the cases, it's a nice theory, but when you get into the cases, the detail and precision and the continuity of memory is specific enough that I think it explains more to hypothesize if there is a continuity of individual memory, rather than hypothesize that we are tapping into some impersonal, collective memory, and I give all the reasons and whatnot for the article. And Urban is a wonderful thinker. He's a great man. And in this case, he was convinced. I persuaded it. And so I don't think it's an either or. I think there is a species mind. There is a collective mind to the species. There is ways in which we can tap into that mind in various contexts, but there is also an individuated mind that's alive within the context of the species mind. And I do think that, to me, the universe seems to want, wants to create the opportunity and to enhance individuality, we have two truths that are operating here. One is the truth of connectivity, the truth that we are all connected, the truth that there are larger patterns of knowing and there's a larger connective tissue to the universe. And we are discovering that at all sorts of levels. But the other truth is that the truth that the universe seems to want to seed and encourage individuality. It's a both and situation. I think reincarnation speaks to the individuality side of it, and in terms of why these children remember and most of us don't, that's an empirical question, Stevenson says. And he says, we don't know, we just don't have enough research, but he has a hypothesis. He finds that about 60% of his cases, of his children in their previous life died violently, and the symptoms of a violent death is a traumatic ending of life. And out of the remaining 40% of majority of those died suddenly within 24 hours of the onset of an injury or an illness or they died with an acute sense of unfinished business. So a woman who dies in childbirth, all her energy is giving birth to this child wanting to take care of a child. Our business man has been working on a corporate merger for years and years, and is just going through and suddenly he dies. So either traumatically, suddenly, or with an acute sense of unfinished business. It seems to create a kind of a pull to finish that business, to stay connected. We find that these children reincarnate faster than the population at large and closer to home than the population at large. Average time interval between the death of the first personality the birth of the second personality for these children two and a half years. Average range is 50 miles from the birthplace of the first personality to the birthplace of the second personality. When we do studies in hypnosis with the larger population, there have been several studies studying hundreds and up to 1000 people, and we try to get a demographic for people who don't remember their previous lives spontaneously. You have to you would you have to evoke that memory and bring it forward in some way. We find that the cycle time is much longer, approximately one life per century, right? One life a century, nine to seven years, is what one research team found. And so it seems that we're incarnating faster now than we did in times past. And it seems to me that part of that is because they're sending more opportunities to have varied experiences. You know, if you were alive in the 25th century Egypt, and then not too much going on, that's different in the 24th century, you know, it's just not a whole lot of change. But now there's so much change, so much variety. People are coming back a little faster. But if your person dies when they're 65 you know, average 3035, years of birth time before they come back into another lifetime. But these children come back very fast. Two and a half years. It's almost like they bounce back. And they've got an unusual attachment between these two lives. One other question, yeah, are you going to be dealing with channeling at all? Not really. That's some of those variations coming from Yeah, can you repeat the question? Or at least, will I be addressing channeling? And I just hadn't intended to here. It's just kind. Of it poses a separate set of theoretical issues that we'd have to address. Yes, I just

Audience 2  25:07  
had a question about I just started reading your book, and got about a third of the way through it. And one of the things that struck me, and I haven't read anything else about it first that I've started, it struck me that one of the things you were saying was that that children, that children are the ones that seem to be the most believable, and because they haven't had all the other input in you know, so is that where the research goes then, as I know, I've read some of them that you put in later that were not children. Yeah, it just seems so much more believable with the children.

Chris Bache  25:54  
Two bodies of evidence, one body of evidence that comes from Stevenson's research is all focused on children, and he likes them, because some adults do suddenly develop a spontaneous memory of a former life. They travel somewhere, they go to a city they've never been in before, and all of a sudden they know their way around, and they have that deja vu kind of feeling. But the problem is that there's so many opportunities where they might have accumulated that information. Normally, it's hard to eliminate that. Two year old, we got a better chance of eliminating the possibility because we monitor our children carefully. We know who's had access we know what information they've had access to. So that's a nice population. That's why Stevenson focuses on that in past lives, therapy, not always, but most of the time. We're dealing with adults, but that's a different population, because here we've done something to awaken a memory, either massage or meditation, more commonly hypnosis. So there we're dealing with a different population, which generates a difference, a different body of data, and we have to sort of sift that data using different criteria, and I discuss the differences in those two populations in life cycles, yeah,

Audience 2  27:12  
I just want to say one other thing. This is just kind of a funny thing that happened to me when I was reading your book, and I was reading it last night, and it's always been in my head that I used to be an Indian. What you know, but I went to sleep after reading your book, and during the night, I got to be an Indian all night. I thought

Margaret Hiller  27:36  
to myself, Oh, is that? What

Chris Bache  27:40  
was that? I'm sure it was just a dream. Carnation, yeah. True, then just think of, look at everybody in this room. Just imagine how many centuries, millennia of experience are tucked inside these bodies that we have. And what's the most natural thing in the world that something might awaken a particular memory. It's just the most natural thing in the world. Once you understand that inside you, your consciousness and your body, your habits of mind, are grounded in 1000s and 1000s of years of history, and when and your relationships are grounded in 1000s of years of history. It's like just you start living in a different time, saturated universe, and you start giving yourself permission to embrace some of the things about your life that have always been there, but maybe you never really embraced because our current system, which said you've only been alive as long as this body has been alive, didn't give you an explanation for why it's there, like this interest in Indian culture, aptitudes, alright? So this is, I'm not even talking these aren't the two I want you to pay attention. It's you're looking for your first encounter with this material. What the kind of here are my favorite books on to go into what is Roger Wilber, who died just about two years ago. He's now open to bleacher seats. Hey, Roger. Roger was a Jung Ian therapist. Jung Ian therapist got involved in past lives therapy. He became one of the great past lives therapists. He's trained hundreds and hundreds of therapists, and if you are looking for one book by one therapist who takes you into the methodology of past lives therapy takes you into cases, discusses those cases in a very intelligent fashion, gives you historical background. He's a good historian. He's a wonderful therapist. This. Is my favorite book. I mean, there's a number of very good authors writing people who are past lives therapists. Brian Weiss is a very popular one many of you have read. But to me, Roger is he's just one of my favorite authors. In this way, he just, he gives you cases, he helps you understand because what's really important about reincarnation is not just the fact of it, but it's the other concept karma, cause and effect, that there is a cause and effect relationship that links us, and it's all cause and effect. I mean, there's we know our world is saturated physically with cause and effect. And Roger is showing that details the way our psyches are also part of a larger cause and effect process that we are constantly drawing upon a matrix of causation which creates conditions within which we experience life, how we think, how we Feel, whether we're introvert or extrovert, whether we're attracted to sports, whether we like mental games, physical games, whether we like bonds or brunettes, whether we are we have to create a will die, or whether we're kind of a goal on kind of guy. These things, everything has cause. Everything has history behind it, so much so. But by the time you read enough cases, you begin to realize everything comes from somewhere. Nothing comes from nowhere. You like cooking, if you like Carl, if you like adventure, if you are a home body, if you're a foreign body, everything comes from somewhere. Things which you were naturally good at, they started somewhere in a small experience, which then was cultivated and then was cultivated until eventually it manifest in the life as a natural aptitude. Mozart started writing his music when he was three years old. If you ever listen to his first concerto, when this is written by four or five year old child, you know, how does that kind of knowledge present itself in this genius? Well, in one time true, we have no real way to explain that. We hypothesize genetics, but in reincarnational framework, it said, This is not his first time with music. He's worked music before. His aptitudes are there, and we find this is true with people who are, for example, good with guns. There'll be a case somebody's good with guns, always had an interest in guns, always been a good shot. Well, turns out that, you know, he's got history with guns. He was a marshal of a previous life. He did this or that the other So Roger Wilber is just one of my favorite authors. It's an easy read, and Anne Marie has this one in the bookstore. Yeah, I just

Speaker 1  33:09  
want to ask, since you mentioned karma, the definition that I keep hearing over and over recently is much more like retribution. It's like you did this, and this gets that the original definition that I that I knew of was that you hate getting opportunities to learn something, and if you don't learn it, you get another opportunity to learn it. Would you clarify for us,

Chris Bache  33:35  
karma has a bad reputation when it's put into Puritan cultures and there's a vengeful God in the background. And karma is like Whitman shape, you know. And all karma means is that which causes. It means a volitional Act, a chosen Act, which which causes the pair is actually karma, the pop up, cause and effect. So cause and effect. It's just cause. It's, it's totally neutral. It's, there are some causes, but if you die by being thrown off a horse and you have a phobia of horses in your next lifetime, that's cause and effect. It's not because you did anything wrong and you're being punished. It's just neutral cause and effect. If you cheated somebody in business, and your next lifetime, you find yourself being cheated in business. That's karma, cause and effect, which has a moral quality, but perspective. That's why, in life cycles, it's going to come up on the screen in a minute. I differentiate between moral karma and non moral karma, you know, it's just karma. Is karma. It's just cause and effect. We have had a tendency to interpret karma in terms of punishment, but punishment, you know? So my view of the universe is the universe is not interested in punishment. The universe is only interested in growth. Growth is like, you know, if you fail a student on a test, you're not punishing them, you're just giving them feedback on what and they haven't learned certain things, and you give them opportunities to learn it again. So anything which is not learned in one lifetime, you'll have opportunities, not necessarily in your immediate life, but in sub subsequent life, to learn. We also have a very linear concept of reincarnation, so life a leads to life B, which leads to life C, which leads to life E. Turns out it's not nearly that simple to me. Life is like playing cards. You got 52 cards in the deck, but your hand only has five or seven whatever card depending on what you're playing. You may have 100 lifetimes behind you, but in one life, not all of those 100 lifetimes are equally relevant. Only some of those lives are relevant to this particular life. So they are the major lives for this life. What's going on with all your other lives? They're kind of like in the background. They're kind of like in the choir, waiting. You know, they're just kind of quiescent. So in one lifetime, in the 21st Century, the threads of your what you're dealing with may, may come from your most recent life, but not necessarily, it may come from the life of the 17th century, a life in the 14th century, a life in the 10th century, and those threads kind of come together and are woven into the issues that you're challenging yourself with in this lifetime. And I also tell my students it's a wrong formula to think reincarnation gives you an opportunity to get it right. That's too short a time frame. The universe isn't interested in just you getting it right. The universe is interested in building galaxies, building solar systems. It's interested in, I mean, the universe thinks in time frames of billions of years. Why should the universe be only concerned in a very small 100,000 year time frames. The universe is creating giants, giants of soul, and so it's not getting it right. That may be a short term. It's really about the open ended development of our capacity over vast stretches of time. It's about creating genius. It's about just creating more and more and more potential inside the human form. So it's much more open ended than we've had a tendency to think in the past.

Margaret Hiller  37:59  
I love the phrase you use last time you're here, that reincarnation is the universe's way to roll forward information and intelligence. Am I remembering?

Chris Bache  38:10  
The universe is like ecology. It wastes nothing. Everything we learn is rolled forward into future learning. It just keeps somehow, the way I see it, you know, evolution is up to a time the universe is learning expresses itself in creating a whole new species. You know, species evolve together somewhere along the line, sufficient consciousness is concretized to produce individuals, and then evolution can evolve not only whole species, but it can evolve individuals within the species. But the principle is the same in both. It folds forward the learning of the group, or the learning of individuals, into future manifestation. So basically, nature recycles. It always is folding out. Holding our learning forward, taking it someplace we haven't been before.

Audience 3  39:06  
It saves everything. I've been hearing a lot about empirical knowledge and data collecting. Where do you place the concept of all right, a lot of people's journey right now is getting to a higher level of consciousness, developing yourself spiritually. Where do you place? Intuitive knowing you know not anything gathered from books, but an intuitive knowing and a feeling of rightness. This is right, and it rings true, you know, and it may go against the mainstream of modern thought, you know, and even reincarnation. And then your inner knowing says this is what I believe. Regardless of what's out there, there's an inner knowing that's telling you this that

Chris Bache  39:57  
is one of the many qualities which we're developing. Up, and you know what? Our consciousness faces out and consciousness faces in, right? So we're learning a whole lot about what's out there, and then other people seem to be more, kind of more concentrated on learning to trust what's in here, going deeper within, and learning to listen and learning to affirm the voice that rises from within. Creative artist, you know, intuitive scientist, good parents, just learning to trust the voice which rises from within in their circumstance, our culture doesn't support that very much right now, because we are so oriented towards external verification. But if knowledge phase is in and certainly the memories of your previous lives, which give you the texture of what you perceive to be true, what you feel to be true, then I think developing that inner intuition. You know, it's critically important, really important. I'm going to put the other two books up here, just to keep us a little on track,

Chris Bache  41:21  
Carl Bohm and Anne Marie has her work. She has two books, and this is her first book. Carl Bohm is an interesting woman, very grounded, very matter of fact, a nurse got into this kind of only because her own child, she had a child. She wasn't really interested in reincarnation, but she had a child who started having nightmares, started having nightmares and night traumas, and like any mother you know, want to take care of her child. And she began to pay attention. She began to read. She began to understand Stevenson's work and reincarnation, and she was eight long story short, she was able to help her child uncover the trauma that was disturbing his sleep and helped him make that conscious and remember enough of it, and then it washed through him, and it left him alone, and it healed him. And she began to realize that if this is true for her child, there must be other children out there. Stevenson is not interested in healing children. He's interested in documenting the cases, but there are other children who are living unresolved issues from their most usually, their most recent life, and she began to help put things up on the web. And when she put things up on the web, she started getting hundreds of people writing her, saying, My child is like this. Can you help me? And to make a long story short, she kind of became a clearing house for cases and information of work from parents who were concerned to help their children deal with memories that were disturbing them in some form or another. And I find her a very grounded person. She's really she's well read. She documents her sources. Well, it's an easy read. It's a very inspiring read, because her cases are just so provocative. She wrote a second book. What was the name of it? Do you remember Andrew read it? Children from heaven, or something from heaven? Memories of heaven, something I uh, she became eventually, you know, she now, this is what she does professionally. But I love cases where people just come out of the from the bottom up, where they didn't, weren't trained in this, but they kind of just come out of the circumstances of their life. If you read this book, I think you'll see that kind of woman. She just is a compassionate, competent she's a nurse, and she has one story after another of children and she has and she's speaking to parents. She says, What? How do you how do you treat a child who has a spontaneous nightmare? What's the best way to do and her advice is, attend, listen, encourage, and you don't have to worry about it. You can trust that the system is going to work itself out. If you push it away, it'll stay. If you let it into the room, it will resolve itself. It will come forward and resolve itself. And it's not injurious for children to have these memories. You don't have to worry that they're going to be overwhelmed with something that they cannot handle. The system is self regulating in a very wise and profound way. And life cycles is the first. First book I wrote. Now this is, I guess that's was published in 1990 so it's, it's been around for a while. It's over 20, close to 25 years old. As a young academic, I found Stevenson's cases really important, really powerful. So this book, basically, there's a chapter on the evidence. And I summarize some of Stevenson's cases, and I try to make them more reader friendly than Stevenson does. And I summarize about, I think, four or five of his cases, and I summarize about four or five cases from past lives therapy, and draw from different people, but basically my position after we get past the evidence chapter, my position is there is overwhelming empirical evidence that reincarnation is a fact of life. What do we do now? What's it tell us? What's it say about what difference does it make how we live our life? What does it tell us about our identity? What does it tell us about our relationships? Turns out, the biggest chapter in the book is a chapter on reincarnation in Christianity, and because it's because most of my students were in my classes, they were coming out of a Christian background. They read Stevenson's book. They were convinced by the cases, but their religion told them that they couldn't accept these cases, and they were caught between a rock and a hard place. And so I wanted to sort of say, well, you know, do you think Christianity could ever incorporate this evidence? Christianity first rejected evolution, but now, you know, all sorts of thinkers are showing us how you can integrate evolutionary theory with Christian principles. Could Christianity ever incorporate reincarnation evidence, and what would it look like? What would a reincarnation affirming reincarnation Christianity look like? So I outline what I consider the minimum and a maximum option that's available for people who come out of a Christian background. And there's a chapter on the family, you know, how it changes our thinking about having children and the children who come to us, because from this perspective, we don't create our children, you know, and the qualities that are in them are not simply the sum of the qualities of the parents or our

Chris Bache  47:31  
grandparents absolve. They are whole and complete unto themselves. They bring the lineage unto themselves. Our job is simply to help them unfold their potential and help them actualize the being that they already are. And if you approach children in that way, I think you get better results than if you expect them to stay close to the root of your family tradition, it gives us more permission. So there's just all sorts of topics that I try to I also address. There's a chapter on what's the Did Jesus teach reincarnation? There are some people, you know, Jesus did teach reincarnation. My first love, academically, was in New Testament research, and I learned Greek and Hebrew. I mean, I really want to get close to the original sources, and I don't think there is sufficient evidence right now that compels the conclusion that Jesus taught reincarnation, but there are some very interesting, provocative possibilities. And of course, in many of the Gnostic Gospels, it has Jesus teaching reincarnation, and in many of the early communities of the first 200 years of the church's life, reincarnation is a very common idea in some of these communities. So are women? The role of women as equal to the role of men in the church? But we know what happened to that one. You know, that went out by the fourth century, and the reincarnation belief was that went out in the sixth century, the second Council Constantinople, they kind of put the kibosh on that one. So I asked the question, Why? Why did reincarnation? Why did Christianity reject reincarnation when it was circulating, that's a version of the gospel in the early church. Was it? Is it because it's incompatible with anything Jesus really taught? And I rely on a man named Gettys McGregor, who's a Scottish theologian who's written numerous books on Christianity and reincarnation, and his position is Christianity rejected reincarnation for political reasons, not for metaphysical reasons. In a nutshell, in the context of the fourth century, the Roman Empire is falling apart. The Visigoths are at the gate. Everything is collapsing. The church has just barely gotten a foothold in the culture of the Roman. Empire that just been welcomed on footing with the pagan religions. Things are just beginning to look up. By the fourth century, and all of a sudden, the Roman Empire is falling apart and society is fragmenting. We're on the eve of the Dark Ages. In that context, the church, I think they were doing, trying to do a good job. I think they were asking the right questions. They asked, What would Jesus want us to do? What does Jesus want us to do? And they became convinced that a secret to the survival of the church lay in a highly centralized authority, and they create model on Roman government. So you had the Emperor, you had the Senate, Carl, bishops, and so on, so forth, down to the people. So it was a vertical, top down system, highly centralized authority, Grace flow through these channels you couldn't have it wasn't coming up. It was coming down through a narrow set of channels. In that context, reincarnation, you can see threatened that centralized authority, because if reincarnation and karma are true, everybody is ultimately responsible for their own salvation. You do not need priests, you do not need bishops, and you do not need the Pope. Everybody is working it out on their own. They thought that was just too it threatened, if we went this way, would be weakened and diluted. And they basically said, we're not going to go that way. We're going to keep it highly centralized. Okay, if that worked for the fifth, sixth century. But does that work now? Right now, I think that's holding us back, because, to my way of thinking, the belief that we only live one lifetime is actually reincarnation. Is the missing piece living in an intelligent universe. If you believe that God is intelligent, if you believe that there is wisdom in existence, if you believe that there is compassion in existence, but you believe that we only live one time, and you can't see it. You can't see the intelligence of life. If you believe we only live one time, you can't really see the compassion of existence. If you don't understand the fact of reincarnation, once you kind of open up to that possibility, then you can look at these pictures that we saw at the beginning of the talk of these galaxies and Nebula this vast expanse, and you can begin to see the causal matrix where the intelligence is expressing itself inside Our lives and inside the circumstances we find ourselves in. And so if Christianity had a reason for rejecting rebirth, for its survival at one point, now, I think if we reject rebirth, it undermines their teaching of a compassionate, loving God. And I personally, I think Christianity, I think this community is a symptom. It's a sample of Christianity pivoting on that past and opening up to a new a new understanding, a deeper understanding of the gospel. So if you read these three books, and you can always go back to Stevenson and Winifred Lucas, but if you read these three books, the vision that opens is that life is a cycle, and the way I like to think of it is expansion and contraction. When we die, we expand into soul awareness. When we're born, we contract into individual egoic awareness. The ego egoic awareness evolves. It changes over time, but the rhythm of life is this expansion and contraction. So you want to do a quick exercise. This is what I call the yoga of reincarnation. Stand up for a second.

Chris Bache  54:15  
We'll close our eyes in a minute. But this is what I'd like you to do. Put your hands together and picture in the middle of your hands light now when you breathe out and expand our arms, like open them up, and then bring them back together. And then just keep it up when you're ready, close your eyes and this picture every time you open your hands and bring them together. It's 100 years of time. When you die, you move into the soul condition. You remember who you are, what you are, you. When you're born, you become small and focused

Chris Bache  55:06  
and picture yourself every time you bring your hands together, a different sex, different gender, a different color, a different country. Different

Chris Bache  55:32  
language, we die, we expand. We're born. We contrary, we

Chris Bache  55:49  
you might find that this ball of light in the center of your closing hands is actually getting brighter, because every time you do this, the knowledge of the center is growing stronger, the knowledge base, the conscious base, is getting stronger. And if we stay doing this for about an hour and a half.

Audience 3  56:24  
Just imagine how much light we would be bringing

Chris Bache  56:30  
into that center. Now open up your Listen, really, really fortunately, stretch and then born into this center. Move your arms in different directions. Really open it up, knock your neighbors.

Chris Bache  56:57  
The Yoga of rebirth, expansion and contraction.

Unknown Speaker  57:13  
All right?

Chris Bache  57:24  
Why can't you remember our former lives as so great? Why do we forget what is the purpose of forgetting our previous lives? Why go through all that written to die to remember who we are? The reincarnation is true, and I think it has to do, actually, with it's critical at a certain point in our in human evolution, forgetfulness is necessary to reduce the discontinuity that is responsible for exponential change.

Unknown Speaker  57:58  
Say that again,

Chris Bache  58:01  
forgetting, is responsible for producing discontinuity, and the discontinuity is responsible for exponential change. So imagine your God, which is not difficult for some of you, right? You got you're creating a system, and what you want to do is evolve life into more complex forms as fast as possible. You could create a human being and give them 100,000 years of life, harvest them and then see how much he or she has burned. Or you could create a human being, give them 100 years, get the same 100,000 years, but break it up into 100 year increments, and every 100 years, change places on the board. You are a man now you're a woman. You're a soldier. Now you're a poet. You were rich now you're poor. You keep changing positions in life. At the end of the same 100,000 years, which one of those two options is going to produce a more complex, textured individual most of us would choose, I think the 100 year increments. Why? Because variety is the spice of life. Variety causes us to grow in ways that sameness doesn't How do you create variety? You have to create discontinuity. You have to forget who you were, what you knew in one life, and begin anew in a new set of circumstances. If you didn't remember what, there would be no learning in the end, you have to remember your former lives sooner or later. But the time to remember isn't necessarily right here right now. It's when you die, then you remember when you're born, you forget. So it's kind of like I tell my students, you know? So if you have a fight with your boyfriend or your girlfriend right before you come to class, you can't pay attention to what I'm saying. Your mind is still out in that fight. You're just not here. I think you have to forget your life in order to learn something new as fast as we wanted you to learn at a university classroom, so this forgetting is important in order to create the conditions for accelerated learning.

Speaker 2  1:00:30  
I was wondering I recently heard a constant of that of perception. So do we bring something about our perception, not necessarily memories for all of us, but our perception from our past lives, like someone was saying that we have our five senses through which we see the out of the world, then we have our mind integrates the information, then we take action, but that the Joker in the deck is our perception. We all have a different perception. And could that perception kind of be what we bring in from our past life, even though we forget the life? I mean, I have no clue, but I know I have perception that's been a joker in the deck many times, and that when I start to, when I start to see that that perception is distorted, then I'm learning, yeah,

Chris Bache  1:01:33  
sometimes they're distorted, it's distorted and needs to be tweaked, and sometimes it's accurate and doesn't need to be tweaked. But, yeah, I mean, basically you're pointing to like, what you were talking about with intuition, perceptions, gut, hunches, feelings, all of those things carry through. We may not remember the details of our previous life. I mean, I don't remember the details of my previous life this. I didn't until I started digging in the basement with hypnosis and whatnot, but I but they were still those perceptions, those aptitudes, those affinities were still present. Now here's one other last thought. I don't think we're going to keep forgetting our former lives when we incarnate. I think if you do this exercise and it's just try this at home and do this yoga reincarnation for 1520, minutes, sooner or later, it seems to me, if we reincarnate long enough, often enough, the consciousness that we incarnate into is getting stronger, stronger, brighter, clearer, sooner or later, it seems to me that the soul, which is the consciousness that integrates all of our lives, that's waiting for us, that We return to when we die, that soul is going to incarnate on Earth, intact, without amnesia, without loss of memory. That I think, is the next step in human evolution, is the birth of the soul in history. And we know that the soul we take on more qualities, more soul qualities, the older we get. That's why we talk about someone's an old soul, someone's a young soul. We know what we're talking toward, but sooner or later, I think we're going to see we'll look back and we'll see that this forgetfulness was actually part of the design. But that doesn't mean we're trapped in it forever and ever. See the way the system, the way reincarnation is believe now is that once you achieve enlightenment, once you achieve some type of spiritual breakthrough, once you wake up to the divine being that you are and we all are, then what happens you leave the system. The Hindu first Hindu concept, of reading of enlightenment was Moshe. Moshe means escape, escape the physical world, escape Samsara, escape into the spiritual world. But to me, that's that's just the first approximation. That's a first understanding the ultimate goal is not to escape. It's to wake up here, so that heaven becomes the condition on Earth, so that eventually we will be born and we will not forget. We will have complete knowledge of our entire history, and we will have a deeper communion with the spiritual universe. We won't be estranged from the physical, from the spiritual reality. So just because we forget now doesn't mean we forget forever.

Audience 3  1:04:54  
Yeah, going along with this is a quote from Thomas a campus. The Ring. If one knew all, one would forgive all.

Chris Bache  1:05:07  
The past, if one knew all, one would forgive all. Yes, what you just

Speaker 1  1:05:14  
said about the ultimate goal was that we would remember everything.

Audience 2  1:05:24  
How does it? It does not fly in face of what we were just talking about then about it's good that it's like that because we don't remember, and we have all these different hundreds of newer experiences, being different people, being different things, and we put those all together, and all of a sudden you've got this wonderful universe of knowledge. However, what happens then, if we become people that can remember all of it all

Unknown Speaker  1:05:55  
the time? Does that what happens

Margaret Hiller  1:05:57  
next? Yeah, does that kind of limit our I having

Speaker 1  1:06:04  
all the different experiences and being have the massive knowledge. You

Chris Bache  1:06:09  
see the question, if there is a reason for forgetting, then what happens if we don't have to forget anymore? And it's very clear, all of a sudden, we're playing a different game. The game has changed. It's a different system with different rules. We don't really know what that those rules are going to be like, but I think the system differs that we will be playing a different game. And I think, personally, I think that the system is, we all know we're in a global systems crisis. We're all know that we're at a dead end in history. We all know that we can't keep going the way we have been going, or we're going to go extinct as a species. You know? I mean, I hope that's not news to anybody here. This culture, this culture was created by the ego, which means this culture was created by a fragmented psyche, a piece of knowledge that's the only reason why people can be happy themselves, personally, why so many other people are suffering is because they only experience a very narrow portion of the mind. They don't experience other people's pain. It's their pain. But if we, if we were to become fully conscious and fully in communion with this deeper underlying connective tissue, we would create a different world, we would create a different culture. And I think there's a tremendous psychic pressure building, just as economic, ecologically, economically, politically, we know we need to create a different world. Spiritually, I think we are growing into a different identity, and I think these two are reinforcing each other, so that I think if we don't wake up at a soul level, we probably will go extinct at an ego level. If we were to wake up at the soul level, we would become a different species. We would become a species of Buddhas and Christ, we would become awakened being. And then ask yourself, what could the human species accomplish if we truly were awake, as Christ was awake, as the Buddha was awake, what could we accomplish clearly we changed the planet. There'd be nothing that we couldn't do if that happens. So I think we are in the process. I think the design is to push us into this deeper sense of identity, so that we have a deeper sense of inclusiveness, so that we can create a world as one author put it a world that works for all this, what I call the birth of the diamond soul. I think we are in the process of birthing the diamond soul in history. And the diamond soul is simply my way of languaging the identity which we have been cultivating for hundreds of 1000s, possibly millions of years the soul identity, but the soul identity conscious inside time and space. And I think some of our great saints and sages were prototypes of that consciousness. That's why they they teach radical terms. They teach about the family of humanity and the oneness of God and the oneness of life, those don't make sense to egos that awakens in us, this intuition that we know is true because our soul knows it's true.

Speaker 3  1:09:59  
Yeah. Just reminds me of a son who I call an idealist, but he's got a lot of anger out there about the psych guys, that conspiracy thing, but he's really saying what you just said. He thinks you shouldn't have to have money. You should be able to create a world that works for all. But instead of being in a peaceful place like a Buddha monkey, he's Yeah, Buddha,

Chris Bache  1:10:27  
well, I think all of us have felt that anger. You know, we feel that anger at different times. That's, there's, there's great truth expressing itself in that anger. There really is anger is tricky, isn't it? It'll eat you up. It really will just eat you up. And on the one hand, you don't want to eliminate the truth that that's in it. On the other hand, there is, there is, I mean, I get angry. I get angry at things like this, but it's not a place you want to live from. It's not a place you want to stay from, and it requires, I think, an understanding of a larger landscape in order to put that give that anger a creative outlet, give that anger a place to go, because anger ultimately has to be tempered with compassion so that it can mature into wisdom, so it'll be wise action, not destructive action. But it's a tricky thing, because it's there's a truth there

Speaker 3  1:11:42  
to other people about what the conspiracy part and disputing that anger to others. And I, you know, I see what I learned for unity is quite the opposite. What you just said was so profound because it really brought tonight. I'm not talking about the son of something. Me. I really wish I could inspire him to be wise.

Chris Bache  1:12:16  
He'll find his way to it. Sometimes it's very useful sometimes, I mean, I value deep, introspective work, so sometimes it's useful to follow something like that to its source, to really go into history, to get at the very roots of that anger. Because sometimes, even though, if it's true, it's an accurate perception in the world, but sometimes there's a there's a cause for that deeper in our personal history, which when we get as a cause and clear the cause of that anger at a personal level, sometimes it gives us a little we don't have to let go of the truth, but we can let go of the anger, you know. So there's lots of ways moving into it.

Speaker 2  1:13:00  
I was thinking that couldn't not just be anger,

Speaker 3  1:13:07  
but an elective frustration at

Speaker 2  1:13:11  
what is and what can be, and that more people don't get it or not making enough progress in the in that direction, and, you know, and being, you know,

Speaker 4  1:13:31  
unable to do anything about it, yeah, and then it just turns inward, yeah,

Chris Bache  1:13:37  
my students are angry, you know, they're trying To make their way in the world, and they know it's not working, and it's getting worse. The sea level is rising, the jobs are moving. They're angry. But how do you how do you use that perception in a way that doesn't eat you alive? So shall we call the close to the first segment and Take 10 minutes be back here? 1130 okay, I'm just

Margaret Hiller  1:14:40  
Oh, yeah, what happened? What time did you get here?

Speaker 5  1:14:54  
I had to do an interview, three articles due today for natural week. Oh.

Audience 3  1:15:09  
You okay, and then I told Mary to be a little bit late.

Speaker 5  1:15:18  
Looks like they're recording it. Yeah, be nice to Yeah,

Unknown Speaker  1:15:31  
hopefully make an audio or something, yeah, yeah.

Unknown Speaker  1:15:50  
Good to see you. Yeah,

Speaker 6  1:16:05  
continuously embarrassed now i.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
