Rick Archer  0:22  
You welcome to Buddha at the Gas Pump. My name is Rick Archer, Buddha at the Gas Pump is an ongoing series of interviews with spiritually Awakening people. I've done over 500 of them now. And if this is new to you and you'd like to check out previous ones, please go to batgap.com B, A, T, G, A, P, where you'll find all the look under the past interviews menu you'll find all the previous ones organized in several different ways. This program is made possible by the support of appreciative listeners and viewers. So if you appreciate it and would like to support it in any amount, there is a PayPal button on every page of the site, and there's a donations page for people who don't like to deal with PayPal. My guests today are Michael Pollan and Chris Bache. I'll introduce Michael first. Michael is the author of eight books, including how to change your mind. Michael, say something, because Chris's voice is, picture is on the screen.

Michael Pollan  1:26  
Yeah. Hi, Rick, hi Chris, perfect to be here.

Rick Archer  1:29  
There we go. There's Michael. Mike, I think Chris sniffled or something, brought him up. He's the author of eight books, including how to change your mind, which is the one we're going to be talking about today, and the number of books about food, including cooked food rules in defense of food, The Omnivore's Dilemma and the Botany of Desire, all of which were New York Times bestsellers. Michael is a longtime contributor to the New York Times Magazine. He also teaches writing at Harvard and the University of California, Berkeley, where he is the John S and James L Knight, Professor of science journalism in 2010 Time Magazine named him one of the 100 most influential people in the world. Okay, Chris Bache has been on batgap before in a panel discussion about five or six years ago, you go ahead and say something, Chris, so your

Chris Bache  2:22  
picture Good to be here, looking forward to our conversation today. Good. There you go.

Rick Archer  2:28  
My software switches back and forth according to who's talking. Chris is a professor emeritus in the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at Youngstown State University where he taught for 33 years. He's also adjunct faculty at the California Institute of integral studies and a fellow at the Institute of Noetic Sciences, an award winning teacher. Chris' work explores the philosophical implications of Non-ordinary states of consciousness, especially psychedelic states. Chris has written four books, life cycles, a study of reincarnation in light of contemporary consciousness, research dark night, early dawn, a pioneering work in cycle, psychedelic philosophy and collective consciousness and the living classroom, an exploration of teaching and collective fields of consciousness. His new book is LSD and the mind of the universe, and get the cover up. That's Michael's book. LSD, in the mind of the universe, diamonds from heaven. And I didn't show Chris Michael's book when I mentioned it. Here's a picture of Michael's book, how to change your mind. The subtitle is what the new science of psychedelics teaches us about consciousness, dying, addiction, depression and Transcendence. So it's great to have you guys as I've been really looking forward to this and really enjoying preparing for it, and there's been a lot of excitement, I think, among the batgap listeners and viewers. In fact, I mentioned this interview the other day on some Facebook group. I mentioned Michael Pollan's name, and some guy said the food guy. Michael, how did you, how did you switch, if you did from being the food guy to invest into exploring psychedelics.

Michael Pollan  4:16  
Well, before I was the food guy, I was, I was kind of the nature guy. I've always been interested the reason I got into food is I was very interested in the in the reciprocal relationship between people and particularly plants, but other species in general, and CO evolution, and in book you mentioned earlier, the Botany of Desire, I had looked at this whole question of domesticated plants and propose the idea that they manipulate us as much as we manipulate them, and that that a very fine evolutionary strategy for a select group of plants, and this is true for animals too, is to figure out. And by that I mean you know, through trial and error, natural selection or. Visual selection, what sorts of how, how to gratify human desire. And a big human desire, obviously, is for food. And that's, that's what most domesticated plants have worked on, that strategy. But beauty is another. And I mean, there's a whole bunch of them, and but the one that I found most curious is is the plants that thrive by gratifying our desire to change consciousness. And so in that book, I wrote a long chapter on cannabis and and looking at the you know how it has served the cannabis plant to basically through trial and error, figure out how to engage with the whole receptor network in our brains and elsewhere in our body. And so I've had this long standing interest in in plant medicines and psychoactive plants. And so that was and I kind of laid that, you know, aside while I was doing all this food research for the last several years, and then stumbled on this new research going on to use Psilocybin specifically, which I realize is not a plant, but a fungus. Mushroom to Well, no, it's technically, it's not. It's another kingdom entirely. Actually, we're more like fungi than we are like plants. Plants are primary producers. They can take sunlight and make food from it. We are parasitic on them, and so are mushrooms. So we share that we depend on plants use of photosynthesis anyway, I heard about this research giving Psilocybin to people who were had terminal cancer, and that it was helping them deal with the prospect of death or the fear of recurrence. And this struck me as a very curious, very curious thing to do. On its face, I didn't see the logic of it and and then I was also, kind of, as journalists do, picking up that there was something in the air around psychedelics right now, and that there was a kind of renewed interest that was very serious from a scientific or philosophical point of view. And that came, I was at a dinner party and with a group of people. I didn't know it was a long table and a big house, and I heard down at the end of the table this woman who looked at beauty about my age, talking about her acid trip, and I figured she was talking about some college adventure. And then I listened a little closely, and it was a couple of weeks ago, and here she was, she's very prominent developmental psychologist, talking about the insights into the consciousness of children that her new acquaintance with LSD had given her. And so as journalists, we put together a couple of data points, and that was enough to convince me that there's something going on here that I want to look into so that that's kind of how it happened. I was also just thrilled to have a new topic as rich as this and and one that, you know, I mean, I was a total neophyte when it comes to spiritual matters, neuro scientific matters, psychological matters. So to me, the great thing about writing books and being a journalist and not a specialist is you get to master whole new topics as an adult, and you get paid to do it. It's kind of a gig.

Rick Archer  8:17  
Yeah, I kind of feel that way doing this. It's although it's pretty much the same topic, but a different flavor of it every week, and I love just focusing on it. So one thing that comes through in your book, Michael, is that, and one thing you just kind of alluded to, is that there's certain intelligence in the plant kingdom, and also, and specifically in the psychedelic plant kingdom that you know, they're not just dumb chemicals. It's almost as if there's a spirit of the of the plants, which has an agenda, which has an initiative, which wants, in some people's estimation, to foster human evolution by providing themselves to us as means of shifting our consciousness. You want to touch upon that a little bit?

Michael Pollan  9:06  
Yeah, I don't think I would go that far, or I haven't had evidence to go that far, that plants are bearing a message and trying to get us to save them or save the planet. It could be true, but I don't have evidence of that. But I've, have written on plant intelligence, and I'm I'm constantly amazed at what plants can do and how much we underestimate them. You know, we're learning now that plants have a pretty elaborate communications network, that the trees in a forest convey messages using mycelium, which are the filaments of mushrooms, to send messages to trade nutrients that the trees and forest can warn each other when there's a threat, and when they when they told to that threat, they'll actually change their flavor and in their leaves to make them less appealing to insects, or they'll start producing toxins a very. Various kinds. Plants have memory, plants, plants are intelligent. I have no question about that. It has something to do with how you define intelligence, of course, but a basic definition is a problem solving ability that their reactions to situations are not simply automatic or instinctual, but that they can deal with novel threats in novel ways, and that they can remember things too. There have been some very interesting trials. Monica Gagliano is a botanist who's who's demonstrated that that plants can remember and store information in a way. So I have enormous respect for them. I think that they do have we have to acknowledge they have a kind of subjectivity the way we do. They're conscious, not in the sense I think we normally mean by that word, which also folds in ideas of self consciousness and a subjective sense of what it's like to be Chris Bache or Rick Archer or Michael Pollan, I don't, I don't. I don't have any reason to believe they have that, but they have a point of view, and they have interests, and they pursue these in a different way than we do, and they're conscious in the sense of being aware of their environment and responding appropriately.

Rick Archer  11:20  
We may get into this later, but some say that, you know, consciousness is fundamental, and matter is sort of an epic phenomenon of consciousness, rather than the other way around, and that all forms of matter reflect or express consciousness to varying degrees, even a stone and obviously way On up the evolutionary ladder. But let's table that for for a little bit later. So you heard, you overheard this conversation at the dinner party. And so how did you proceed? I know you proceeded in many cases with a great deal of what every case with a great deal of caution and seriousness, reluctance, trepidations. You were often unable to sleep the night before a session because you were sort of anxious about what might happen.

Michael Pollan  12:08  
So, you know, the idea of even having a session came, you know, came a little later. The first thing I did was reach out to an editor at the New Yorker and say, I've got a really cool story I want to write about these trials, interview the people who are who are going on these Psilocybin journeys, talk to the scientists, try to understand the neuroscience of it and the psychology. And to my delight, they were willing to underwrite that project. So that was the beginning of my investigation, and I wrote a piece for The New Yorker, which came out in February 2015 called the trip treatment, and it's available online for free. And if you just search that, and that was a kind of straight ahead piece of science journalism, there was no participatory angle to it. I don't think they would have published it if there were. It was all like white coats and scientists and and patients, volunteers and but the interviews were extraordinary, and the people I met and the kinds of transformative experiences that a single psychedelic journey had given them completely resetting their attitude toward death, lifting their fear entirely. In many

Rick Archer  13:22  
cases, any cancer patients, I'm sorry, cancer patients,

Michael Pollan  13:26  
these are cancer patients, yeah, with serious diagnoses. I mean, some were terminal, some were paralyzed by fear and anxiety at the threat of a recurrence. But in all ways, they were. They had this, what the doctors call existential distress and and they found relief in about 80% of the cases, which is quite remarkable, and it's a single intervention. I mean, we don't have much like that in psychiatry, right? Or palliative care, you know, we have morphine we give people which dulls their perception and relieves their pain but doesn't, doesn't help them spiritually, deal with the situation they're in.

Rick Archer  14:02  
Tell us some more anecdotes, and give us an overview of the research that's taking place. And it's not only cancer patients, but alcoholics and depressed people and right? And so it

Michael Pollan  14:14  
started with cancer patients. You know, the first kind of clinical applications, and the reason for that is a couple. One is it's a sympathetic group. The regulators are a little less worried about any potential toxicity in the case of people who have terminal diagnoses. In the same way that you know people with AIDS, they would, they were willing to give drugs that hadn't been thoroughly vetted yet if people wanted to take them. So there was a comfort level, I think, for the regulators, and a sympathetic angle for the for the public in general. I mean, how could you withhold this from someone who was dying and had fear, you know, tremendous fear. And here was something that promised to to lift it. But since then. Since the success of those trials, there have been several others looking at different indications, medical indications, an important one that's being worked on now is depression. And this grew out of the the cancer trials in that they saw that depression scores, as the psychologists measure them, had dropped significantly, and so the FDA actually encouraged the researchers to Why don't you look at depression more widely? Because this is a tremendous problem. The tools we have to treat it are very poor. Rates of depression are rising rapidly. I think a big question remains is whether depression is one thing, and if the kind of depression that a cancer patient experiences is similar to the kind of depression of someone who has a, you know, general depression or treatment resistant depression for years and years and years, the cancer patients depression is recent, very often and has a has a clearly defined cause. And that's not true for everyone struggling with depression. So we'll see. We'll see if it works. There's some evidence that it will. There was a trial at Imperial College in London of depressive patients treatment resistant. I believe they were, and many of them, most of them, showed significant but short lived results. They their, their depression lifted for a couple months, and then gradually it returned, not in all cases, but in most of them. So there's, there's encouraging reason to pursue this. And there, there are two big trials going on right now for depression are about to get started. There have been, as you suggest, trials for addiction in in alcoholics and cigarette smokers and cocaine addicts and those, in a preliminary way, are showing very promising results. And I think that's interesting, and may turn out to be, I think behavioral change may be one of the really big applications of psychedelics. With that in mind, they're looking at Johns hop Johns Hopkins, I think, is going to look at eating disorders, and that's very important, because anorexia is actually the hardest psychiatric illness to treat, and has the lowest rates of success and the highest mortality of all psychiatric problems. So I think if we can make progress on that, it'd be fantastic. Let's see what else is being tried. There was a small trial of obsession, obsessive compulsive disorder, and there'll be more work with that. The drugs have been used with high functioning autistic people who have social anxiety and that that result has been encouraging also. So there's a whole range and to people who think, well, how can psychedelic be such a panacea? I think it's important to note that the kinds of problems it works on or seems to be effective with have a lot in common. They're all at the end of the spectrum where people's thinking becomes too rigid, too trapped in deep grooves of habit, whether mental habit or behavioral habit, people are in these loops and they can't break out of them. And what the psychedelics seem to do is is a real jolt to the system, and gives people the kind of perspective on their lives that can actually break mental habit, and it needs to be accompanied by lots of therapeutic intervention. These aren't people going off and having a Psilocybin trip in the woods alone. These are guided trips, and I think it's a really important distinction. People are very carefully prepared in advance, told what to expect, how to deal with difficulties that will come up if they you know, because it can be a very, very frightening things can happen, especially if you're if you're facing your mortality, and then during the experience, the guides are with you the whole time in the university trials. Are usually two guys, a man and a woman, and they're not saying very much. It's very non interventionist. The idea is to basically give you a sense of safety so you can surrender to what can be a very disturbing set of mental events. And then after the session, you come back, usually the next day, or in the next couple days, and you have what's called an integration session, where you tell the therapist what you saw, what happened, what you're puzzled by, and with the therapist, you try to kind of come to some interpretation of what's happened and figure out how you can take the lessons, the insights of That trip and apply them to the conduct of your life.

Rick Archer  19:43  
Have these therapists usually taken Psilocybin themselves so that they have a better idea of what the person is going through?

Michael Pollan  19:52  
Well, I can only guess about that, because none of them will admit it. But, you know, but I. Can see why it would put them at reputational risk for objectivity. People would challenge the study, saying, These people are, you know, aficionados of psychedelics. You know, I have reason to believe that some of them have but none of them would talk about it on the record. A couple would talk about it off the record, and some would just simply say, No. So it's hard to believe you wouldn't develop the kind of curiosity I developed, because in the course of doing this research, I it became clear to me that I couldn't really understand what these volunteers were going through without having a similar experience myself. And that's and that then became the more autobiographical part of the book where I engaged with several underground guides because I couldn't get into the above ground trials and work with them to have a very similar experience in a slightly different context.

Rick Archer  20:56  
Yeah, your your answer to that question brings up a point, which is that, since, I guess it was the early 70s when Nixon declared Timothy Leary to be the most dangerous man in America, and psychedelic research was clamped down upon, there hasn't really been much going on. And now it sounds like it's kind of burgeoning, but is it, I mean, can anybody, anywhere who's qualified study this, or is it still like a real trickle compared to what might be taking place?

Michael Pollan  21:26  
The only reason it's trickly at all is that there's no federal funding. All the funding is is private money, charitable donations. And luckily, there's a lot of visionary people with a lot of dough in this country, and they're supporting the work, but there's quite a bit of it. There are many universities around the country getting interested and getting involved. There is these two depression trials, each are going to have six or eight sites, each of which is a medical school or a university. The FDA is not standing in the way. They made a decision way back in 92 because people have been knocking on the door for a long time, that they would treat psychedelics like any other drug, and if you could persuade them that there was a good reason for this experiment, they would grant permission, and the DEA would grant a license to use it. So I haven't heard of people, you know, I mean serious researchers, encountering federal obstacles. The main obstacle is money, okay,

Rick Archer  22:32  
yeah, your comment about the kind of commonality of all the types of difficulties which are being addressed with psychedelics, being that all these people are too kind of rigid or locked down in their thinking or in their perspective. I was thinking that as you were leading up to that comment, it seems like Psilocybin and some of these other drugs they're using are so different from usual protocols, because most things tend to dull you in one way or another, you know, whereas this is a real opening up of your awareness and a radical shift of your perspective. In fact, I think you say many times in your book that a lot of people say, Wow, that was the most profound experience I ever had in my life. And I don't feel like drinking anymore, taking smoking cigarettes anymore or something. So it's interesting that there could be such a thing that, you know, with one session would give you such a radically different perspective and shift your behavior permanently.

Michael Pollan  23:34  
Yeah, and the I also, you know, other psychiatric drugs essentially deal with symptoms, and you take them every day, perhaps for the rest of your life, and chemicals are in your brain all the time. Here you've got this one shot or two shot intervention, the chemical, which is not very toxic, whether you're talking about Psilocybin or LSD, is in your brain for a short amount of time, and you are dealing with cures. In many cases, you're solving the problem because you're, you're, as you say, you're not dulling the patient. You are opening them up, and, I think relieving them from ego consciousness for a period of time. I think that's, that's probably important way, you know, mechanism for how this works. One of the really interesting findings of the research that I cover in the book is, you know, the effort to figure out what's going on in the brain when someone's having a psychedelic experience and the current thinking is that there's one particular brain network, the default mode network, which is this tightly linked set of structures in the midline that connect the prefrontal cortex to older, deeper areas of memory and emotion in the posterior cingulate cortex. And this, this is kind of the the orchestrator or conductor of brain activity. This network you. It is closely associated with the generation of the idea of a self and so it's where self reflection takes place. It's where time mental time travel takes place. Theory of Mind, the ability to impute mental states to others, and what's called autobiographical memory, the faculty by which we take the events, whatever happens in our lives, and tie it into the story we tell ourselves of who we are. So you know, if the ego could be said to have an address, it's probably in this area, and this area of the brain is suppressed dramatically. And this was a big surprise, because they thought psychedelics in the brain would just represent a lot of fireworks, an excitation of everything. In fact, it's the opposite for this one particular network, and you can correlate a radical down regulation of the default mode network with reported experiences of ego dissolution. When people tell you, yeah, on that trip, I just completely my sense of self was obliterated. They will see on the FMRI that their default mode network has been essentially deactivated. So that's a very interesting insight into where that kind of thinking to the extent it has a material manifestation, where that's happening. And it may be that the relief from ego consciousness and an overactive default mode network is implicated in a lot of these problems, like depression. You know, there is research to suggest that depressed people have an overactive default mode network that's that is kind of punishing, and they can't get out of their heads, because the default mode network also lights up when you're when you're mind wandering, when you don't have anything in the world getting your attention. It operates in a seesaw relationship with the intentional network, the attentional networks, and so giving people a vacation from that, that of you know, that kind of regulatory authority allows lots of other activity to bloom. And there's an illustration in my book that shows it was an attempt to show people how the brain gets rewired during the Psilocybin or LSD experience and so and in this drawing you around this circle, you get all these different brain networks, you know, the visual cortex or the auditory networks, or the you Know, the networks that direct your physical activities, and suddenly you get all this communication between networks that don't ordinarily communicate with one another, and that might explain synesthesia, the phenomenon of being able to see musical notes that perhaps your auditory center is talking directly to your visual cortex without Going through the default mode network, so the brain is temporarily rewired. And we know that brain connections, you know, are new ways of thinking, and if you have them, even temporarily, you can exercise them and make them more salient. And so it's just a theory, but that's one of the operative theories of what might be going on here that you know, when you have some profound insight on psychedelics, it may be that the product of, you know, connecting the dots literally in a new way.

Rick Archer  28:34  
Yeah, a couple of thoughts on that. One is that if we think of the brain as a filter or a lens or a receiver of consciousness, rather than as a generator of consciousness, then you know, what you said about the default mode network shutting down or being becoming more quiet would imply, perhaps that there's less filtration taking place, so whatever consciousness is can shine through more fully. And you know, the ancient traditions say that consciousness is bliss in one of its attributes. And so, you know, you can experience very gratifying, fulfilling states if that default mode network is shut down. Somewhat. Another little point there is that a lot of the meditation research has shown that there is a remarkable degree of coherence between different parts of the brain that are ordinary, not correlated or coherent with one another, as measured by EEG. So you know, frequencies will just sort of line up in synchrony, whereas before they were asynchronous.

Michael Pollan  29:33  
And also, you know, the meditation research done by people like Judson Brewer, who also has taken fMRI images of experienced meditators while they're meditating, those scans look very much like the psychedelic scans. He saw that actually, and was quite struck by the similarities. So that meditation also down regulates the default mode network. And I think that's really significant. But your point. Too about, you know, opening up the doors of perception, as Huxley called it. You know, when he talked about the reducing valve, it was pretty clear he was talking about the ego. The ego is really what walls us off from, you know, whether it's internal, unconscious material or external sensory information, and what seems to be, you know, it is what defends us from being overwhelmed by reality, by being overwhelmed by nature, by being overwhelmed by what's in our unconscious and and those walls come down, I think, during psychedelic experience, and that that accounts for the sense of merging that people have. And so I think that, you know, I think we're talking about a lot of different vocabularies for the same thing. I'm using ego and walls, and I know that's very psychodynamic, and you're using a more spiritual vocabulary, but I think we're talking about the same thing, yeah, I think so,

Rick Archer  31:02  
Chris, do you have any questions or comments on what we've been saying so far?

Chris Bache  31:07  
I've just been enjoying Michael's presentation a great deal. I'm so deeply appreciative that a person of your caliber, Michael has done such an excellent job of presenting the history and the issues in the people's lives being touched in this form of therapy, you just open up the conversation to many people who previously would have just never been willing to have a conversation about psychedelics, and you've done such a good job with it. You've done it so well, and you capture the personalities involved so well. Just really appreciate what you've done.

Michael Pollan  31:41  
Thank you. Well, I was, you know, I was approaching it from outside, obviously, and with a certain, you know, naivete and skepticism and, you know, I mean, there are people with a lot more knowledge and experience in the psychedelic world, but they've tended to be in a conversation that takes place within the psychedelic community. And I wasn't coming from there and, and I also always write for an audience that I don't assume has any interest in the subject. I'm just much more interested in in in talking to the general reader and, and, you know, grabbing them by the caller and say, Hey, this is really cool. You should you should read this stuff, whether it's about food or agriculture, all these kind of things. So I think that that stance was very useful to me in in bringing people into this conversation. And it's been very gratifying to see how many people and whether they're in the therapeutic community or the neuroscience community, have gotten excited in the last year about the potential here, and want to get involved as researchers and as people experimenting with psychedelics. So, you know, look, this Renaissance was happening. I mean, I was reporting on saying that was already happening, but I feel very lucky that I was able to play some role in bringing people into the tent, yeah.

Rick Archer  33:09  
So we can probably spend an hour going through all the various stages of your exploration, you know, with psychedelics and different experiences you had, and all that stuff and all that is covered very well in your book. So I think what I'd like to do is just ask you a question which came in from someone actually named Susie Parkinson in Carlsbad, California. She asked, since your original psychedelic journeys, or as a result of them, perhaps, has your belief system or perspective changed, deepened or taken on a meaning which it didn't previously have.

Michael Pollan  33:44  
Yeah, it's a great question. Thank you for posing it. My experiences have changed me in various ways. I think for the most part, the personality changes are pretty subtle. You know, my wife's not here right now, but I would drag her in to say, to tell you that I've asked her this question because your partner knows you better than anybody else and is very sensitive to any changes. And she basically feels that I'm a more open and patient person than I was, and she was very apprehensive when I started getting involved with this, that I might change for the worse. She doesn't seem to think I have intellectually, there has been a change. I think my understanding of spirituality has changed, and what that means. Think it's important to understand you guys work on these issues all the time, but I was really kind of spiritually retarded before I started this, it's just a part of my life, my mind, that I hadn't developed. I mean, some people look at body and desire, and I think that's a very spiritual take, right? I talk about food in a very spiritual way, and the importance of communion, but I really didn't see myself as spiritual, partly because my understanding of spirituality was that it existed. Suggested in opposition to science skepticism, and that implied a I'm telling you, I was retarded, but it implied a belief in the supernatural things beyond the scope of science never to understand. And so I approached it that way, and I was very much a pretty confirmed materialist in my philosophical outline, that that the laws of nature could explain everything. And I realized how limited this was. And so I had after my psychedelic journeys, and after one in particular, where I had a very profound experience of transcending my ego, my usual sense of self, and I actually beheld myself dissolving. I'm first bursting into a little cloud of post it notes. That was me, and it was, there was nothing left. And then another time where I was, I felt myself kind of spread out on the ground like a coat of paint or butter. And but a new perspective arose for me to observe this scene, and that was the spooky part, and it's the part I still don't understand. From what new point of view was I taking in the scene? It was an eye that wasn't familiar to me. It was an eye that was completely fine with what was happening, unburdened, untroubled, disinterested and reconciled to whatever there was. And it was quite profound and and once that sense of self was gone, I was totally open or unprotected, undefended against anything and and then started merging. And in this in this particular instance, I merged with a piece of music I had had my guide put on this unaccompanied Cello Suite by Bach number two and de Mudra, which is a very sad, beautiful piece of music, and I became it. There was no subject object duality at all. I was identical to this music. I could feel yo, yo, Ma's the horse hair on his bow going over my skin. And I was inside this dark well looking out and the breeze of the vibrations of the music. I could physically feel them. It was, it was remarkable. And I came out of that, you know, the next day, I went to my guide for integration, and I said, Well, I'd have this experience of complete ego dissolution and the and she said, What did you learn from that? I said, well, that you're not identical to your ego. You don't have to there's another ground on which to stand, but it was a very mysterious other ground. And she said, Well, wasn't that worth the price of admission? And I said, Yes, but it was really interesting. But what do you do with it? You know now my ego is back in uniform, back on patrol, and so what good was it? And she said, Well, you'd had a sample of this way of being, and you can cultivate it. And I said, How? And she said, through meditation, basically. And like, I'm, like a great many people and a great many American Buddhists, this opened a door into and made it it made me much more comfortable in the mental space of meditation, and I could navigate it better. And sometimes I do attain that perspective that I had had during that that Psilocybin trip. So did that make me more spiritual? I am not prepared to conclude that that new perspective that opened up, it was some Transpersonal perspective or some universal consciousness. I know that Aldous Huxley, you know, when it happened to him, said that was the mind at large, which was something that we tune in, that's outside. I'd be really here, curious to hear Chris's take on that. I don't know. It could just as easily be another product of my mind that, you know, I hadn't experienced before, because the damn ego, you know, overshadowed it, but I came to see that my my understanding of spirituality, was faulty, because the what spirituality is, for Me is powerful connection, an openness, an undefended ability to connect, whether it's to nature, which is very important to me, the natural world. And during another psychedelic experience, I had the sense of nature being very much alive. I mean, the leaves in my garden were returning my gaze, in some sense. And it was a beautiful experience. It was really wonderful. So there was the connection to nature that is opened up, and then there is connection to other people, the feelings of love that so many people report on psychedelics, and this powerful connection to other people and the universe in some more general way. And so that's what spirituality. Is now to me, it's it's opening the gates so you, you can connect at a very deep level without any screen between you and the other, no subject object. And so I learned that the opposite of spiritual, the word spiritual, should not be material, as I understood it. It should be egotistical, because it really is the ego that stands in the way of those powerful connections, and that the Ego is the Enemy of spiritual development. So that's kind of that was my takeaway. It's not final in any way. I think I have a lot more to learn from the experience, and I might come out in a different place. I'm very curious about, Well, Chris, I would be curious to know how you would interpret that experience of this new perspective opening up on your dissolved self.

Chris Bache  40:52  
Well, you know, as I listen to you speak, I'm reminded of Sri Suzuki in his beautiful little book on meditation, big mind, little mind, and you know, it's like there's little mind which is very efficient getting things done, sits at our desk, you know, answers the phone, and then there's big mind, which is really that dimension of mind which is just so profoundly larger than other than and inclusive of little mind. It's just a different wavelength of consciousness. And so then the question is, of course, all of the meditation traditions agree that there are many, many layers to ego. So you can kind of get clear at one level and get caught in another, and clear at that level get caught another. It's a labyrinth kind of thing. But according to their ways of thinking, it is possible to profoundly quiet still allow ego to become transparent. And when ego becomes transparent, this this larger background context surfaces in awareness. So that rings true. In my experience, the question then becomes, okay, if there's little mind and big mind, what is the nature of mind? Just mind, and that opens it, then we're then we're off to the races, because then we get into a very interesting discussion of what is the nature of consciousness, and what is conscious, and who can have consciousness, and so on so forth. So,

Michael Pollan  42:26  
I mean, what is the nature of mind? I know that's a big fat question.

Chris Bache  42:33  
Yeah, that's a big one. And it's, it's, it's, personally, I don't have a vested interest in specific definitions of consciousness and specific definitions of mine. I'm kind of happy to go where different people want to go with under with definitions of consciousness per se, as long as the definition is open to a complete phenomenology of mind, because my background training is in philosophy of religion and phenomenology has been a large part of that. So I think it's important for us to critically, not naively, but critically, look at the broadest body of data that we have for what mind is and how mind manifests, and what it can do. So, can mind influence the health of the body? Can mind actually influence physical objects? The telekinesis can Is there a mind can linking between human beings and plants, so that there can be a genuine exchange of information at some level. I mean, that opens, that gets us into the deeper question. And then when we go to Aldous Huxley, and he goes to mind at large, that's the assertion of an encompassing mind that holds all minds, all sub minds, held within a master kind of intelligence of the universe. I'm comfortable with that concept, just because I've had so many experiences of so many dimensions of that mind that I'm comfortable I talk about the creative intelligence of the universe. I don't know what to call it on site. I don't know what name we should give it, and I'm sometimes I'll talk about it as the divine, but I'm not a theist, and I'm not a supernaturalist. I completely agree with you on that way, to me, it's all natural, it's all nature. It's all part of nature. And there's nothing about for me, the study of consciousness, which should be beyond the range of scientific investigation, but I've spent so much time over the many years exploring different aspects of that mind that

Michael Pollan  44:50  
using what tools,

Chris Bache  44:52  
well, my primary tool has been LSD. In my explorations, I also have experience. With Psilocybin and other in Ayahuasca and salvia dip and norm and but my primary instrument of exploration was LSD use in a particular a very specific modality. So I don't should I describe this Rick? Should we do this now?

Rick Archer  45:19  
Or let me just wrap up a point that Michael made earlier, and then let's do it. Michael was saying that he used to have a sort of a version to the notion of spirituality because he felt it was anti scientific. Excuse me, if I didn't express that quite right, but there was, you know, some distrust of it, because it seemed probably you've heard, you heard a lot of woo things. I mean, look at I mean, religion and science have been at each other's throats for a long time. People used to be burned at the stake for believing that the earth wasn't the center of the solar system. And I feel that we've reached a point where science and spirituality can complement each other tremendously. If we take anything that spirituality or any religious tradition has ever proposed or suggested as a hypothesis, rather than as something that we ought to believe in, then it's something that's potential that might be open to investigate, experiential investigation. And I think Chris will comment on a lot of things he's investigated experientially, which might seem extremely hypothetical to the average person that has some of these things have very far reaching implications for humanity, for religion, for spirituality, I don't think there's a heck of a lot of value in just believing in something because somebody says you ought to, or some tradition says you ought to, or anything. I think everything should be open to experiential investigation. So that's what the scientific attitude brings to spirituality. On the other hand, spirituality can bring something to science, because science doesn't possess the tools for investigating the subtle realms that spirituality has specialized in, has dealt with. And LSD is such a tool, although ultimately our own, our human nervous system, is such a tool. And throughout the ages, I think what mystics have been doing is using that tool to and fine tuning it and learning how to use it such that they can explore all sorts of subtle dimensions, and, you know, add to human knowledge in ways that modern science Couldn't even hope to begin to do at its current stage. So anyway, I just wanted to get that out. And then you go ahead, Chris, and segue from that, well,

Chris Bache  47:50  
just a footnote. Add a note on to what you said. Rick, it's one thing to study the quantitative qualities of consciousness, and it's another thing to study study the qualitative nature of consciousness. And I think science is extraordinarily good at studying the quantitative nature of consciousness and looking at the various physiological correlations, various states of awareness, so on, so forth. But I think we can study scientifically, if we broaden our methodology of science, we can study the qualitative characteristics of consciousness. We do so by controlled experiment. We do so by getting carefully screened different people from different backgrounds, for example, putting them through the same exploratory regimen, carefully recording their experiences afterwards, comparing their experiences across populations. I mean, we can't put experience under a microscope, but we can use all of our critical skills to study the qualitative nature of experience, and then we can start broadening it into cross cultural and historical analysis. So I think we can be critical, but being critical is larger than being neurological

Michael Pollan  49:12  
Well, I mean, you can't. I mean, the interesting, what's interesting to me about consciousness as a subject for scientific exploration is you can't study it without experience. There's no other tool, right? I mean, phenomenology is the only tool to understand the subjectivity, and at least so far. And so, yeah, I think I agree. I think you have to, you have to go down that path, and you can do that path with a lot of rigor. And it's one of the interesting things about the psychedelic work. The reports of the volunteers are critically important, and you car and sometimes you correlate those reports with what you're seeing on your brain scans and some but sometimes you don't need to. So but, but going back to this question of but, I think a big question is whether you know. Know whether there's any real evidence to think that brains don't produce consciousness, or that, you know, that mind precedes matter? I think that's a very interesting question. And I went into my own investigations assuming, because that's the consensus among scientists is that, well, we don't know how it happens, but we assume that these neurons, these cells, are producing consciousness in some way. Even though it's it's very hard to get from cells to that phenomenon. Nobody has a clue how to do it. That seemed to be the more parsimonious, you know, or starting principle. But a lot of people, after experience of psychedelics come out in a different place.

Rick Archer  50:50  
Yeah, I interviewed a guy a few months ago named Mark Gober who wrote a book called The End to upside down thinking, which addresses this very point. And, you know, it may seem parsimonious initially, that consciousness is just an epiphenomenon of brain functioning, but there are so many anomalies, when you look at it that way that keep pecking away at that materialistic worldview. And Mark and his book really goes through these in a very brilliant way. And what's the name of the book? It's called the end, or maybe it's an end. I think maybe the end to upside down, thinking, by Mark Gober, G, O, B, E, R, and he's he's been on back gap a few months ago, so you can find him there. But it's like there's a new

Michael Pollan  51:32  
book also by Jeffrey krapal. Yeah, this book is fascinating. I recommend him for back on the show. But he's also looking at a series of people, some of them scientists, others philosophers, who underwent this flip in their thinking to to believing that their that you know mind may well perceive matter and has these case histories, among other things.

Rick Archer  51:57  
Yeah. Oh, go ahead, Chris, you're gonna say the

Chris Bache  52:00  
field of study that shifted my thinking in that regard. Because I finished graduate school, even though it was in philosophy of religion, I was a pretty atheistically inclined agnostic. By the time I finished graduate school, I was well versed in the rise of science and human in human values and in enjoyed that and join that movement fully. I tell my students, if you haven't fallen in love with Kant, with science, you've missed the great, one of the great romances of history. I mean, this is just such a massive, extraordinarily ground shaking pivot in human understanding. But one of the areas which shifted my thinking about the idea that our brain creates consciousness, and of course, clearly, our brain does generate consciousness, in a sense, but it was the reincarnation research. It was Ian Stevenson's Research at the University of Virginia and the multiple volumes that he had published documenting very detailed cases of from around the world, children, very small, 345, years old, who had detailed memories of what appeared to be their previous life. And he was able to extract, get those memories, consolidate them, and verify sufficient number of those memories to build an extremely strong case for the fact of reincarnation without knowing the theory of it, without knowing how it actually takes place, that there is some type of continuity of consciousness. Now, there's lots and lots of levels of issues involved in this one life to another life. Yeah, it seems to be. I mean, some people would say, well, those memories are actually drawn out of the collective unconscious. And you know, that doesn't show continuity of life to life, but I think Stevenson's evidence is really a strong evidence for some type of continuity of an awareness from lifetime to lifetime, especially his last two book, which is a two volume book on philosophy and on reincarnation and biology, in which he studied 170 87 cases of children who not only had psychological recall from their previous lifetime, but actually bore the marks in their body in the form of birthmarks, which replicated wounds of death in the previous incarnation. So somehow, it was as if consciousness had been traumatized in such a way that it not only imprinted on subsequent mind, but it imprinted on the body of subsequent mind. So after looking at this data a lot, I think what it tells us is we have information in our mind that predates this body, and if that's the case, if and if those can be legitimated, verified memories, then that indicates that there is at least in some way in which our awareness, our memory, our mind, is not generated by our.

Rick Archer  55:00  
Brain. A very simple metaphor for this, which I'm sure you've both heard is, you know, I mean radios and televisions, they are detectors, or not transmitters. They're receivers of fluctuations in the electromagnetic field, which is ubiquitous, and if the radio breaks, the radio transmission from the, you know, tower 50 miles away or something, doesn't stop. Other radios can still pick it up, and we can get a new radio and listen to it again. So if consciousness is a field, as opposed to just a product of the brain, then, you know, very we're all tapped into that field, and we kind of share it in common as a foundation. But then, how do you account for individuality, and an individuality moving from life to life, from from one body to another? And that leads me into a question I'd like to ask, which will get us a little bit back to psychedelics, which is that, you know, research shows that subjective experiences in meditation and other spiritual practices have physiological effects, which we've been talking about. And Western science is only able to measure the gross physiology, and traditionally, it's understood that we also have a subtle physiology. Chinese and Vedic systems offer elaborate explanations of the subtle body using terms such as Qi or Prana or Sushumna and Ida and Pingala, nadis, etc, and these traditions understand that it's necessary to condition and strengthen the subtle body to sustain the enormous flows of energy that accompany spiritual awakening. Often spiritual aspirants spend years or decades doing this before awakening occurs. So what are so this whole subtle body thing has implications for reincarnation, because it would be the subtle body that moves from one gross body to another when the gross body wears out. The Bhagavad Gita says it's like changing clothes. So, but here's the question, what are your thoughts on the fact that anyone can ingest a psychedelic substance without having prepared the subtle body, or can psychedelics facilitate such preparation? Either of you can answer

Michael Pollan  57:12  
this. Give this one to Chris.

Chris Bache  57:16  
Thanks, Michael.

Michael Pollan  57:18  
Now the question is built on an understanding of subtle bodies and gross bodies that i is totally unfamiliar to

Chris Bache  57:24  
me, in answering, in responding, I don't want to assume the your observation that is the subtle body that transfers from incarnation to incarnation. It may be, I'm just not sure that we've nailed it down that close. Let's take its hypothesis and so again, individuality is the whole question is, what is individuality? So is the individuality of one life transferring to the individuality or intact in another life? And I think those are very subtle and complicated questions, and I don't mean to prejudge them at all, so I don't want to assume a set answer to what is individuality or what is the subtle body that said my experience, I have a lot of convictions around the subtle body, and specifically the impact The way psychedelic experiences can impact the subtle body. But to explain, I mean, I can't let me say a little bit of about my background, because there are so many different variations of psychedelic experiences, and I want to define mine. That's the body of data that I draw from when I finished graduate school in 78 I met the work of Stanislav Grof. Immediately, he had just published realms of the human unconscious. He had 100 of 100 essays published by that time, and I was immediately taken atheistically agnostic as I was, I was immediately taken by his research proposal that through these substances, if they were used in a careful and controlled circumstance, that we could use them to experience deeper dimensions of our own mind. And I was particularly interested in his observation that one can go deeper than personal consciousness. One can go deeper than even collective unconscious. You can go deeper into the mind of the universe itself. He didn't say it quite like that, but that was the implication of what he did. And I was immediately fascinated by that, because I was a philosopher of religion and exploring the the consciousness of the universe, if there is a consciousness of the universe, could have enormous implications for a variety of philosophical questions. So this was 1978 and I wanted to do the psychedelic work. I was just like Michael, after doing the research and looking at the literature and looking at some. Other people's lives had been changed. I wanted to participate, and I basically did what Michael did. I basically made a choice to have some underground experiments with psychedelics. I mean, I don't like going underground. I'd much rather be in a legally sanctioned experimental protocol, but that wasn't available to me. So I chose to learn Stan Grof methods for working with psychedelics and can and how to have a psychedelic session, and all the ins and outs that have now become kind of standardized in psychedelic protocols, to use his methods, and then to use them privately, to explore my own consciousness, and to do it as rigorously as I could, using all the philosophical and phenomenological and psychological tools I had gathered in graduate school. Now, Stan differentiates between two different types of psychedelic work, low dose psychedelic work, usually between 15 200 micrograms and high dose psychedelic work, which is usually up to maybe 500 micrograms, 600 micrograms, the low dose method generates a sort of a gradual, slowly peeling back the layers of consciousness to this personal unconscious through The perinatal or the Death-Rebirth dynamics into Transpersonal reality. The high dose psychedelic work was in the early years, focused on working with terminally ill patients, cancer patients, and they were basically trying to not heal the personal unconscious, but to kind of blow through all the levels of the personal unconscious. Trigger a near death type experience, a trigger a profound encounter with the universe, and then see let that encounter with the deeper structure of the universe, to see how it might impact their anxiety around their imminent death. So what I did, after about four three low dose sessions, I opted to work with a very intense regimen with LSD, I worked at psychedelic therapy. I did what turned out to be a 20 year regimen of doing high dose psychedelic therapy, always using the same protocol, always using the same test conditions. I worked at 500 to 600 micrograms, which is not a protocol that I recommend. I really don't I didn't know as much then as I don't know. But what I did was to do 73 high dose, fully internalized, therapeutically focused psychedelic sessions with the sitter and my wife, first wife, Carol, who is a clinical psychologist, agreed to be my sitter. And was my sitter for all of my sessions. And I just press this I worked for four years, then I stopped for six years, and then I came back and worked for 10, very aggressive years. So over the course of 20 years, I did 73 sessions. Now I wouldn't recommend this protocol. I would really recommend people work with lower doses. And you know, there is no research protocol right now federally sanctioned that is recommending or looking considering using doses as high. But I wanted to push the limits. And I thought that if psychedelic, high dose psychedelic work could be done safely three times in the Spring Grove project, then it could be done safely more than three times. What I found was that it could be done safely more than three times. But it's very, very demanding work, and it's more demanding than the original protocols that Spring Grove envisioned, and it opens up opportunities that the early protocol did not envision, but it also opened up challenges that the early protocol had not envisioned, and one of those challenges has to do with how these deep states of Consciousness impact our body and impact our subtle energy system. Because what I found was that when I would go, when I went into these states and went into deeper levels of consciousness, and then stabilized my level of consciousness, my consciousness at that level, so that my conscious experience was coherent and stable at that level, eventually pushing, continued to push, I would drop down later into a deeper level of consciousness, and then stabilizing at that level and then dropping into a deeper level of consciousness. Each state into a deeper level of consciousness was a state into a higher level of. Energy, just extraordinarily, very, very powerful levels of energy, so that I had to work very conscientiously, as all long term psychedelic journeyers do, work with the body, work with the subtle energy system. Work to detoxify the body. Work to clarify negative emotions. Work to basically strengthen the subtle energy body. So basically, purification, I think, is essential and is endemic to working with psychedelics. In Tibetan vadna, the monks have to do ngondro before they are allowed to take into the high teachings capable of generating, you know, enlightenment. So ninja, with the found ninja are the foundational practices. They're the five, 100,000 practices that every monk does in Vajrayana. One of those practices involves doing 100,000 prostrations while reciting mantras and prayers and doing visualizations. That's a tremendous transformation, clarification, strengthening of your subtle energy system, and they do this as a preliminary to entering to receiving the teaching that will allow them to enter into the very, very deep states of consciousness that vara makes possible. If you go into these deeper states of consciousness quickly, like you tend to do in psychedelic states, tremendously powerful purification processes are are triggered. Physical purification processes, physical detoxification, emotional detoxification, mental detoxification, there's a tremendous kind of catharsis that takes place at all of those levels. And some of those levels, I think, are well described in terms of our subtle energy system. So we you really have to work with the subtle energy bodies, and I don't think of them as just one body, but multiple bodies, but mesh very well against the Indian Ayurvedic system or the Chinese acupuncture meridian system.

Rick Archer  1:07:09  
Yeah, you're actually almost downplaying what you went through here. If people were to read your book when they do, it's a tribute to your wife that she was able to sit through these sessions as your sitter watching you go through this because you were going into convulsions, there was projectile vomiting, you were making all kinds of weird noises. And you know, what you were experiencing subjectively, was excruciating. In many cases, I mean suffering beyond anything you could have imagined. And you chalk it up to deep purification. You say in your book, the core of the cycle is this increased awareness triggers the surfacing of toxins in the system, that in turn precipitates a crisis of disease, followed eventually by a higher level of health. This cycle operates at many levels, at the physical level, the psychological level and the soul level. And very often I'm just summarizing here, but very often in your sessions, the first part would be one of these horrible ordeals that you would go through, and then the second part, having cleared that away, you'd go into an ecstatic realm and experience all kinds of beautiful things.

Chris Bache  1:08:20  
Yeah, basically, again, might. I'm going to discuss this strictly in terms of the LSD body of work. After I stopped my sessions I had. I've done Psilocybin a number of times. I'm comfortable in that world. I've done Ayahuasca several times. I'm comfortable in that world, but I really would like to restrict myself to just the LSD work in describing this,

Chris Bache  1:08:54  
when you when you die as a self, when, when You know when you I understand psychedelics following Stan Grof, and this is a description in terms of their psychoactive properties, not in their physiological or neurological properties, but psychologically. They seem to activate. They seem to function as amplifiers and catalyst of psychological processes. So they take what is small and make it loud, and they take what is distant and make it close so it basically hyper it's a hyper catharsis and a hyper amplification. We for a number of hours, we enter into a temporarily hyper sensitive state of awareness, and what we do with that awareness determines what happens in a session, we can listen to a concert and have a good time, we can have conversations, or we can go deep within and use this hypersensitivity to unearth the obstacles to healthy functioning. But then if we go deeper, we can enter into deeper levels of existential functioning and deeper relations with the universe. Is, it's important to remember, I think that what we are doing in our laboratories is we are rediscovering a class of chemicals that have been used in cultures for 1000s of years. And you know, Ayahuasca is we have at least 1500 years in Psilocybin mushrooms and Peyote and Mescaline. So there's, there's a lot of history between humanity and these substances. Now what we're doing is studying them in a particular context, which is giving us great insight into these processes. But there's also a large body of wisdom held in these cultures that have been using these materials for a long time. According to many of these systems, their view is that consciousness is a universal quality of life. We are individually conscious. Other aspects of the physical world are individually conscious, but the universe is conscious, and that there there are many tiers of comprehensive functioning in the universe, and when you enter into deeper states of awareness, each of these deeper states is a higher level of energy, which then requires a stabilization that requires a purification process and stabilization process to be stay coherent at that level. Now here's the tricky part. When I started this work, I was thinking, this is all about therapy, or this is about healing my personal psyche, or it's about enlightening Chris, spacious, poor psyche. You know, it's about something personal, but some of the pain that you're referring to Rick came about when I went through after two years of work, went through a crushing ego death experience just cracked me wide open, and then it took me into a new layer of work, where, for the next two years, I went through excruciating psychological, psychophysical suffering. So it was so large and so broad and so deep. And it went on for so many years that eventually I became convinced that this was not about healing Chris Bache his psyche. It's not about purifying something that's somehow personal to Chris Bache, that eventually I was forced to draw the conclusion that somehow something had happened in my sessions, that the universe, or some functional dynamic of the universe, was using my sessions to bring about some type of healing at the collective level of consciousness, some type of healing aimed at the personal psyche that there is. And eventually, the way I understand this is that just as I remember all Chris spacious experiences, for better or for worse the human species, there is a mind of the human species that remembers all of the experiences of all the members of its species. So then, if you think about all the terrible things we've done to each other, and all the wars and all the killing and all the bloodshed and all the rape and all those terrible pains, that somehow the species is stuck with those and has to digest those in the same way that I am stuck with Crispus experiences, and that just as it's good for crisp Bache, if I can somehow confront the darkest pieces of my shadow and bring that to rest. The same thing happens at the collective level for the species as a whole. Usually that type of confrontation takes place in terms of social transformations or social revolutions. But I think in very, very deep psychedelic work, my experience was that somehow something was using my sessions to de effect some body of pain and suffering that was stuck or lodged in the collective psyche. So to me, I just had to go to a collective model in order to understand the data. This actually

Rick Archer  1:14:22  
gives new meaning to the saying that Christ died for our sins. You know. I mean, if, if a being is of, you know, great enough stature in terms of his the vastness of his awareness, then it's like, you know, an ocean being able to dissolve lots of mud and stuff, as opposed to a glass of water, which can only take a little bit of mud without becoming entirely overwhelmed by it.

Chris Bache  1:14:48  
We see that also in the Buddhist traditions, the Bodhisattva is basically someone who basically places the good of the whole over their individual good makes that their project. I don't think this is heavy duty, spiritual requiring great, great beings. I think any mother, any father, worth their soul, would do what they can to help end the suffering of a child that they solve. This is just part of the natural case. What it means to be a human. So if you're given an opportunity, and in some deep psychedelic sessions, you sometimes are given an opportunity. If you're given an opportunity to relieve suffering, it's just the most natural thing in the world to try to do that as best you can, sure,

Rick Archer  1:15:36  
but as best you can, it's a question of capacity. You know, Rupert Sheldrake talks about Morphic genetic fields, and you were just alluding to fields being able to store the traumas of humanity. And I've also, I've heard it said that wars break out when there's enough stress, if you will, accumulated in the field that it can no longer be contained, like the way lightning strikes when there's enough static electricity built up in clouds. And so if we can sort of become that field, or attune ourselves with it, then it seems, from what you're saying in your book, that we can become an instrument for its purging, for its purification. Yeah.

Chris Bache  1:16:23  
I think the universe seems to be intensely interested in us as individuals, but the universe also seems to be intensely interested in us as a species. And when you're moving into that level of consciousness where the universe is communing with the species. And you kind of you've gone through ego death, and you've gone through a series of deaths where you basically have dissolved your boundaries and have basically opened up into not all that is not mind at large, but species mind, the collective mind of the species. It seems very clear that the universe is nurturing the well being of this universe of this species, just as it nurtures the well being of all individuals within the species and all the other species on the planet that there is a there is a tremendous power that cascades through all of our lives, individually and collectively.

Rick Archer  1:17:28  
Yeah, Michael, have we lost yet?

Michael Pollan  1:17:33  
No, I'm fascinated by what I'm hearing. I don't know by how to process it. I'm kind of curious to know, Chris, what? Where did that turn come from thinking you were dealing with your individual suffering, to realizing that this was a collective matter, that this, this was a Transpersonal question, was it? Was it an insight you had during one of these, one of these high dose experiences, or was it in processing it after the fact? Because that's a big that's a big shift.

Chris Bache  1:18:10  
Yeah, it was a big shift, and it is a both and, but probably the most important part of it was after the session, as I processed and worked it. It took me years because I kept trying to process in terms of Stan's paradigm, in terms of the paradigms that were available, and all the paradigms approaching psychedelics were always about healing the individual, enlightening the individual, something like that. And I kept trying to understand, and I wrote Dark Knight early dawn, in large part, to answer the question, Why did suffering get as large as it did in my psychedelic sessions, to try to answer this problem. And eventually, that's where I made the jump beyond the person centered model into a collective model. Now my thinking has gone further since then, but that was where I made the jump, and I wrote that 9596 I started the work in 79 I wrote that book when I was about 15 years into that process. So it took me at least 10 well after when these experiences started, it took me years before I could really say that idea and then agree to that idea. And then once I began to see it and understand it, then a whole lot of other things began to make sense, because the collective level, yeah, yeah, when going after going through that ocean of suffering, I call it the ocean of suffering, which lasted two years, when that came to a culmination, when that. Culminated, and I went through a death and rebirth process that was associated with that level of consciousness, and went deeper into archetypal reality, high archetypal and low archetype of reality I had, I had many, many experiences that basically showed me how that worked. Showed me how the species mind is alive within all of our fractally embedded individual minds, how our individual minds feed into the collective mind, as Rupert Sheldrake says, and how the collective mind move feeds into the individual mind. That this a constant feedback system in that process, and that's intellectually it was Rupert's work. When I integrated Rupert's Morphic field theory into Stan Grof paradigm, that's the part that gave me the intellectual permission to make this radical reinterpretation of the

Michael Pollan  1:20:57  
data that's fascinating. And how do you how do you respond to people who say, Well, you just had a drug experience. You mess with the chemistry in your brain, and you had these delusions that you were getting some kind of insight into something collective. I mean, that's how a lot of a lot of people not versed in this world or having had this experience, would automatically go like, why should a molecule afford such insight?

Chris Bache  1:21:25  
Yeah, well, that's an anthropological question, and I'd rather leave that one to the anthropologist. But I understand the objection. I understand the cautionary concern. I mean, I was trained as an analytic philosopher, and I was trained in a highly, kind of, highly skeptical discipline, so I really affirm that I value that skepticism, but I also I think it's important that we look at the history of human beings use of these substances, and look at some of the literature and how these substances have been regarded in other civilizations. I think it's important to look at all the data that is emerging in the modern study of psychedelics, so that in dark, night, early dawn, I have a chapter on the methodology of basically taking a philosophical approach to psychedelic inquiry. And I list some of the reasons why we should take these series these experiences seriously and we should not dismiss them. One of the data is we sometimes get knowledge in these states of consciousness that we did not have prior and we can reasonably exclude that we did not have. But this knowledge turns out to be true and valid,

Michael Pollan  1:22:47  
like the perinatal research that stand it. For example,

Chris Bache  1:22:52  
some people have will relive aspects of their birth that they can later verify, or, kind of more radically, one can have an experience which teaches you something about how whales give birth, or how lions experience hunger, which you had never no idea of before, never crossed your awareness before, and it turns out to be physiologically accurate. Sometimes, in one case, I remember Stan saying that in one of his sessions, he was confronted with a person who basically was insisting that Stan call his mother and father gave them a telephone number and wanted to reassure the parents that he was okay. And this was really, really strange and out of left field, but they wrote down the number, wrote down the names, and after the session was over and everything was stable again, Stan very carefully reached out to this phone number and found the husband and wife on the other side end of the phone, And it turns out that their son had just died. I don't remember whether it was several days ago or several weeks before, and they they understood that their son would wish them to know that he was okay. So you get very, very unusual circumstances like that.

Rick Archer  1:24:18  
So wait a minute, this wasn't the physical person in the room that gave the phone number. This is something Stan kind of cognized in some psychedelic state, and was was given a phone number by some non physical entity, and then called the parents, and it panned out. It was very fine. Wow. Yeah, that's interesting.

Michael Pollan  1:24:37  
So Chris, you said also though that you wouldn't recommend this kind of regime, I have two questions about that. Why not? And second, after the agony that you went through in these sessions, how did you ever muster the courage to do it again, let alone two more times?

Rick Archer  1:24:55  
Yeah, before you answer that, Chris, I just want to add a little related bit. Did you ever. Feel that maybe you were frying the circuitry you know in your action, that all this suffering was a result of some damage that you were inflicting upon yourself, or that maybe you were opening yourself up to some negative astral level, or something like that. How did you have the confidence to proceed? I'm just adding that on to Michael's question.

Chris Bache  1:25:21  
Well, I really trusted Stan Grof work. I mean, that's why I consider myself in his lineage. My work is based upon his scholarship. I trusted what I saw in Stan's work. I trusted the methodology. I trusted his surveying of the literature. I trusted his evidence that there was no physiological, no genetic damage. I trusted the cases that he presented. I appreciated the rigor with which he had digested all various bodies of psychodynamic theory, as he does in beyond the brain, and integrated them into the phenomenology of psychedelic discourse, and primarily that one of the primary things I got from Stan's work was an absolute trust that if you surrender completely to what arises in your psychedelic session, it will you can trust that. And you may not understand it going in, and it may be absolutely horrendous and painful going in. It may take you months or years to understand why things are unfolding the way they are, but you can trust it, and it will always come out good in the end. And I that was the procedure I took. I found, why not doing this work, and then what happened in the work? Why not doing this work? I wouldn't work in doses that high. I mean, it's not that I wouldn't recommend doing doses that high occasionally, but I wouldn't do such a pounding, blowing of consciousness apart so aggressively for so many sessions and so many years, even though I was doing it in a very responsible manner, I was doing it about five times a year, so I had a lot of time to recuperate. I was taking care of my body. I was doing spiritual practice during all this time. I was keeping detailed notes. I made a phenomenologically precise record within 24 hours of every session. I studied the session, so I was really trying to be as methodical as I could. But basically, by the time I was at the end, time I was finishing this journey, I had a number of breakthroughs and a number of insights we can talk about. But I came to understand that one other assumption that I had made about this work was wrong. The assumption was that there is a certain goal that you can get to, that there was an end point that you could some it could be oneness with God, or oneness or the meta cosmic void, or the super cosmic void, that there was an end point that you would get to. And what I found eventually, when I had gotten I had experienced many permutations of oneness, I found that there are variations and subtleties of oneness, and there are even variations in the void, in the domain of formlessness. And if you if you have a method which is so powerful it keeps pushing you to the edge of your experiential boundaries, it'll keep taking you through remorselessly boundary after boundary after boundary, leading into deeper, deeper intimacy with the I call it the creative intelligence of the universe. I don't know what else to call it. It's infinitely vast. It's infinitely intelligent, it's infinitely compassionate. I mean, it's just what it has taught me, and just the experience of dissolving into it without any boundaries. Left over has been enormous. Has been deeply life changing. But late into the process, about 17 years into the process, I had an experience where I was as far deep into the diamond Luminosity, I call it deep into what the Buddhists call Dharmakaya, the clear light of absolute reality, as far into it as I had ever gone. I was in deep state of bliss and clarity, and all of a sudden, my visual field pivoted 90 degrees, and I saw reality Far, Far in the distance. It looked like galaxies, and a ray of light emerged from that reality and hit me, and it absolutely shattered me. And in those few seconds, I realized it's an infinite progression. You cannot get to the end of the universe. You cannot get to the end of the mind of the universe. It's an infinite progression. And. And that that's one of the reasons I would be gentler with myself. I would be gentler because I think what we can do with these substances, we can open ourselves up to the infinity, and we can take in as much of the infinity as we can get into our system, as much as we can psychologically digest, emotionally digest, physically digest. And I I'm more patient now with the slower trajectory of spiritual and psychological development than I was when I was a young man running into the states.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
