Speaker 1  0:00  
Foreign.

Stephen Gray  0:08  
Welcome everybody. The very first YouTube channel and also audio podcast on Anchor is where it will also show up. YouTube channel interview in a series. It's the series is called, you may have noticed Steven Gray, vision. Stephen gray all one word, S, T, E, P, H, E, N, and then capital, G, R, A, y, vision. And the purpose of these is to explore the possibilities of an awakening humanity. I guess that's the simplest way of putting it. And you will be able to subscribe to these. I hope to be able to put a subscribe button up here somewhere at some point, and some contact information both at the beginning and the end. So as I say, I'm very excited, because this is the very first one of these in a series that I hope to continue for quite a while. Chris Bache is our first my first guest, and we both acknowledge, just before putting on the recording, that we're both feeling honored about this. And so that's really exciting in itself. And so before I actually ask Chris to say anything. I'm going to read a short bio and add a couple of little comments of my own. So Christopher M Bache officially is professor emeritus in the Department of Philosophy and Religion at Youngstown State University where he taught for 33 years. He is also adjunct faculty at the California Institute of integral studies and a fellow at the Institute of Noetic scientists sciences, an award winning teacher. Chris's work explores the philosophical implications of Non-ordinary states of consciousness, especially psychedelic states. Chris has written three books, lifestyle life cycles. I won't describe them here. They're findable, of course, dark night, early dawn, which I read about 20 years ago. Wonderful book the living classroom, which I have not read. And his more recent, or, well, quite recent, about a year ago, maybe. Or was it less, I can't remember, six months. Yeah, anyway, LSD and the mind of the universe, subtitled diamonds from heaven. And also, I'm going to be asking Chris about to give a summary of the 20 year journey that he went on that's described in LSD, in the mind of the universe. But I don't want it to take the whole interview, and in particular, because, well, among other reasons, because it's he talks. He does do a thorough, kind of linear job of going through all that in two or three of these YouTube videos. And so I would suggest, if you really want to get into the details, short of reading the book, which is a stunner. It's just amazing. I would suggest going on YouTube and looking up diamonds from heaven. Time waiver, summer world 2018 and there's like a 50 minute talk that they recorded of Chris going through the whole journey. And that book, by the way, I have it right here, so I'm going to show it to you called LSD in the mind of the universe, diamonds from heaven. Chris, Don't let me forget at the end to ask you for any kind of contact information or links that you would like people to follow up on. Thank you so Anyway, welcome Chris to my inaugural Steven gray vision YouTube Channel series.

Chris Bache  3:51  
It's a pleasure to be with you today, Steven, an honor to be in your memorial voyage.

Stephen Gray  3:59  
All right, so, you know, there's lots of things I want to ask you about and discuss with you, and the I think a good place to start. However, it would be if you could give a relatively short again, because people can go and look at the video videos on YouTube, if you could give, maybe, I don't know, five minute or something. I don't know exactly sort of summary of, you know, well, in the in the talks, you talk a little bit about, you know, what got you into it, you know, maybe just a real brief reference to, you know, why you did this in the first place, and then a little bit about the 20 year journey, and perhaps what you know where, where it went after that, something like that.

Chris Bache  4:46  
So basically, what you're asking for is, is a highlight reel or trailer for the book? Exactly. Yeah. Well, I'm a philosopher of religion. I was trained in philosophy of religion. And I came to this work with an interest in the potential of psychedelics to explore the deeper reaches of consciousness, and by pushing through our personal, personal unconscious, entering into the consciousness, what I eventually came to understand is the mind of the universe itself. So I did 20 years, 73 high dose LSD sessions, and I'd emphasize the significance of that particular protocol, high dose sessions working at 500 to 600 micrograms, because this opened up territory and experiences that were much deeper than when you're working with the types of psychedelics and the levels of doses of psychedelics which are being used in the therapeutic community today, which is so important and very important development there. This was different. This is a much more aggressive shattering of different levels of consciousness and the boundaries of consciousness. I worked for four years, stopped for six years, and then worked for 10 years. I did an average of about five sessions a year. And where I went is a long story, but the highlight reel is I spent about two years basically working at what Stan Grof calls the perinatal level of consciousness, processing a lot of material around very early experiences, birth experiences death, experiences fear of death, experiences existential crisis. Kind of work went through a deep ego death that just exploded my identity and catapulted me into early level spiritual experiences, spiritual reality. Then I spent another two years going through a much more intense purification process that I call the dark night of the soul, where the work clearly pivoted. It took me a long time to recognize it, but it clearly pivoted away from my personal transformation or my personal healing, and entered into the collective psyche, where the focus was the healing or transformation of the species mind itself, where I was processing experiences coming from 1000s and hundreds of 1000s of persons and 1000s of years of time. When that culminated, I was spun into archetypal reality. Experienced various permutations of archetypal reality and vast territories in the collective unconscious. And basically was learning how to how our species lives as a single integrated entity, as a single being, all of us being fractal embodiments of that being. From that culminated, I went through yet another round of death and rebirth into causal level reality, where basically, instead of the world being composed of parts, even the very big parts, of archetypal reality, here the universe basically pulsed as a single entity, as a single life form, dissolving all boundaries, all membranes, even the membrane between matter and spirit. I explored or was given many gifts in that territory for about a year, and a chapter that I call the benediction of blessings, and then for the last five years of my work, I entered into a domain of that I came to call the diamond Luminosity, entering into a state of consciousness that was pure light, and the most difficult thing to describe is the hyper, hyper clarity, just clarity beyond measure of this form of light. I discovered that there are many levels of light, and the diamond Luminosity was the purest, highest level I reached in my work, what Buddhism calls Dharmakaya are the absolute reality, the clear light of absolute reality. For those five years, I entered this reality only four times in 26 sessions with a lot of purification, lot of lot of healing work done in those intermediate sessions, and then I was given one final vision of the human trajectory, where we are in history, which had been a consistent theme in the work, and then basically the universe kicked me out. It gave me two sessions, or wrapped up our work without me really understanding yet at the time that it was wrapping it up, but it wrapped me up, wrapped up our work, and then ushered me on my way, and I stopped my work. So I stopped the work. I began it in 1979 and I finished it in 1999 and after I finished it, Spirit said to me in my meditation, 20 years in, 20 years out, meaning that it would take me 20. Years in order to understand and digest the 20 years of experiences that I had had. And then it just so happened, not by any intent, but it just so happened that LSD in the mind of the universe was published 20 years after my last session.

Stephen Gray  10:20  
Wonderful, yes. And you know, for people watching and listening to this, I want to say that, you know, if you didn't quite gather how stunning this journey, or series of journeys, really has been, read the book because it's mind blowing. It's truly paradigm shattering material. I like to occasionally joke with no particular offense to Terence McKenna, who did a lot of lovely work that the descriptions that he gives of where he went were just kind of tapping into the realms where you have explored, where you've gone into the, you know, in these in these journeys. So a practical question, though, or sort of, yeah, user friendly question, so to speak, you have spoken in different ways about, Well, several things related to this. One is, you said you wouldn't do it the same way again because it was so intense, and then you also understood that it wasn't about getting anywhere particularly. That's one aspect of this question I'm about to pose. The other one is, clearly, this is not for everybody, and so there's something in there, and and then, just on a practical level, for people who do feel like they are those sort of deep exploring Psychonauts and want to do something like this, feel that kind of a call like you have. Could you just briefly describe the protocol, the safety protocol, that you employed?

Chris Bache  11:55  
Well, let's start with the safety protocol. Yeah, I basically use the protocol established by Stanislav Grof in the early years of his work and published in his book LSD psychotherapy in 1980 he distinguishes clearly low dose psychelytic sessions and high dose psychedelic sessions in the early years. Those psychedelic sessions were limited to three. I basically took that protocol, which always and then and then, multiplied the number of sessions to 73 but I was always working in isolation. I was working in the privacy of my home or my wife's clinical office. I was always lying down, protected from the outside world, no interruptions. I had a sitter. My sitter for all this work was Carol, my first wife, a clinical psychologist, listening to a very carefully curated playlist of music to support the deepening and the unfolding of the work. So basically, the sessions were completely internally focused, sheltered from the outside world. There was no interface with the outside world except through the music. And the focus was on encountering as deeply as possible what was arising from within my own consciousness. Now the reason I

Stephen Gray  13:15  
Chris, before we go any further, a quick question regarding the sitter, for anyone who's going to do this kind of work on their own, what would you say the job description prerequisites are for the sitter, like, does that person need to have been to some of these inner realms themselves to be able to do that job? Or what would you say, you know, who could do that job properly?

Chris Bache  13:41  
Ideally, a person who's doing the sitting should be experienced in these domains. It partly depends upon how interactive the work is, but the more experienced the sitter is, the more comfortable he or she is likely to be when the subject gets into this territory. In our case, Carol was not really interested in exploring these domains herself. She read the literature with me, and that's not perhaps an ideal circumstance, but it works sufficiently well for us. The responsibility of the sitter is to take care of the subject so that they don't hurt themselves, because some of the spasms that come up in this session are pretty violent. There's a lot of throwing up when working with high doses, and that has to be taken care of, basically making sure the subject stays focused, so that there's no acting out any attempt to sort of step away and step outside of the session, needs to be discouraged and keep the person focused material and then managing the music, staying in touch with the subject, so that they know they can anticipate where the subject is, sometimes asking questions, but usually not often. So. That they can shift the music when the person has gone into a shift in their own inner experience.

Stephen Gray  15:07  
Can you say a little bit about the music, how important it is? Is it to get the right kind of music? I think in your talk, the one that I mentioned on YouTube, you said something about you kind of a developing quality to the music as it changed over the course of the of the session of the Yeah, it was six, eight hours or so.

Chris Bache  15:28  
Yeah, well, I basically followed Helen Bonnie's recommendations that Stan had cited in his early work. And she differentiates five stages of an LSD session, and there's basically an ascending there's an early latency, and then when the drug begins to kick in, there's a high activation. And again, this is working with high levels of LSD where the activation level is particularly intense, and there's a huge surge in the quantity of energy that one is processing, and that continues to build. And you want music that can encourage the surrendering, encouraging the giving in to whatever is happening, and supports the breakthrough of your own defenses. And then the experiences will build until you reach a level where eventually, if you manage them well, courageously, you go through some form of crisis, some crisis in the experience, some death and rebirth, experience where then you're catapulted for the remainder of the session into the ecstatic portion of the journey. My experiences were always the early portion of the session was a purification experience, culminating and then ending in an ecstatic portion of the experience. Then there's a long peak of the experience, where, once you've made that breakthrough, you want music that supports the long expansing, expansive worldview, and then a very, very slow decline, a re entry with gentle music that gives you a spacious background that allows you to process your experiences, and as you come back to your ordinary consciousness, integrate your experiences With your conventional your identity, your ordinary identity. I found that after a number of sessions, that when I began to use indigenous music chanting with my sessions, I found that to be much more powerful, much more evocative, than classical music, even powerful classical music. So I had a preference for that, and so I collected a lot of indigenous music over the years from different cultures. And you don't want music with any words that you can understand. So you want music that doesn't keep you on familiar ground, which is another advantage of indigenous music, or, you know, vocal or non vocal types, because it throws you into foreign territory, and the foreign territory is what you really want to be exploring right now, not staying on the familiar ground

Stephen Gray  18:11  
Absolutely. Yeah, so before we get into the sort of farther reaches of some of the experiences you had and the implications of that I just listened or watched parts of that video that I had mentioned earlier, and you referenced William James, the great early 20th century psychologist, who said something like that, there are three stages of this kind of work that you've been doing, and one is the first one is kind of, you know, pushing the boundaries, going out into exploratory territory, but then following that up with meticulous recording, and then a third stage of analysis and sharing. Is that more or less

Chris Bache  18:52  
accurate? Yeah, that's my that's not so much William James, but it's my articulation of the principles of psychedelic philosophy based on the pioneering work that James did in that he used nitrous oxide and drew very striking conclusions in the context of the varieties of religious experience book. And basically I just articulated this method from that that you go into temporary Non-ordinary states, you record those states afterwards as clearly and precisely as you can. And that's important, because that's really important, I think, to complete the circle of learning. Because if you want to do this in a systematic fashion, integrating and attending to and trying to understand your experiences lays the foundation a strong foundation for your next set of experiences. Just like our dreams are very revelatory, but if you keep a dream journal, people find that their dreams often become more powerful. More articulate. It is as if your mind knows that you're paying attention. The unconscious knows you're paying attention to it, and therefore it ups its game. Likewise, in a session, the more attention you pay to integration and consolidating your experiences. It is as if the cosmic mind knows you're paying attention, and and therefore it engages you more systematically at the end. So retaining the experiences is really important, and particularly if you're pushing the far boundaries, like I was doing, and entering into territory that was radically new to me and uncertain and I didn't have many cues, even in in the psychedelic literature, for trying to understand much of it, writing at the very edges of my of my ability, and trying to consolidate what I experienced, was an important part of the process. And if I can loop back to your earlier question, why I wouldn't do it the same way again, I wouldn't do it the same way because of some of the things I learned on the journey. First of all, I found that over the long haul, working at doses this high, even doing it very responsibly and conscientiously, and supplementing it with a lot of other spiritual practice, a lot of attention to my body, a lot of yoga, a lot of meditation, it's a very, very demanding protocol. It exerts, it's it's a very taxing protocol. If I were doing it over again, I would be gentler with myself. I would balance high dose sessions with low dose sessions. I would balance LSD, which tends to be a high level, cosmic level psychedelic with Psilocybin Ayahuasca, other psychedelics which are more body grounded in order to facilitate an ongoing integration of the peak experiences, doing it the way I did, just hammering the high levels, Just pushing and pushing, it did open great cosmic vistas. But I think it I think I was harder on myself than I really needed to be, and maybe then was wise, and it took me a long time to internalize and in some ways, to recuperate from that entire journey. The other reason I would do it a little differently is because I learned along the way that this is not a journey that comes ever comes to a distinct end. When I began this work, I thought there was an end point. I was trying to get to the end point. Some people describe the end point as oneness with God, or entering into the primal void, and I had entered into oneness with the Divine many times, and I had learned that there are many levels to that experience, and even levels to immersion in the primal void and deep. About two thirds of the way through the journey, I had an experience where the universe showed me that it's an absolute, infinite universe, I would never be able to get to the end of it. It's an open ended journey you take in as much of the universe as you can, as as healthy and as wise for you. But the idea of getting to the end was just it was a misconception, and because of that, that's another reason why I would just be a little gentler and a little patient with the pace of a slower pace of evolution.

Stephen Gray  23:28  
Yeah, the, my old Buddhist teacher, chugging Trungpa, has one of his books is called journey without goal. And then there's the Are you familiar with the 10 ox herding pictures? Yes, yeah. The way I've encountered them was like, the last one is something like and Thus ends the journey that never need to have been made in the first place, or something like that.

Chris Bache  23:52  
Yes, yeah. And now it's a little different that, you know, I started this work kind of with a focus on enlightenment, and that really is what the 10 Oxford and pictures are about, that journey of awakening to the ever present condition, so that in the end, you come back to where you were, but you come back with your filters clear and the present. The always present, ever present condition is luminously there. That's where I that's the agenda I started with. But it was over come over. It was superseded by two other aspects. First, it was superseded by the challenges of our collective enlightenment, of our collective evolution. Eventually, my personal healing, or my personal enlightenment, was just completely superseded by responding to the call to support our collective transformation, the transformation taking place in history. And the second thing that superseded then even that was the opportunity. Need to explore the deep structure of the universe itself to what I'd call a cosmological exploration. You do not need to explore the deep structure of the universe in order to become awakened, to become to your spiritual senses. You do not need to go back to the beginning of the universe and the Big Bang to transcend all limits of time, to enter archetype of reality, to abide in the true and natural condition that Buddhism calls our essential nature. These are different projects. So my work kind of combined the Enlightenment project, but really it kind of yielded to a different project, what you might call the philosopher's project, the invitation to explore, as far as I could, the nature of cosmic reality.

Stephen Gray  25:51  
Yeah, wonderful. Thank you for clarifying that. So I don't know how to ask this question exactly, or even if it is a good question, but something like this, you know, that kind of deep work is clearly not, you know, prescribed for a great majority of people. It's for particular individuals who feel that they that calling, and, you know, feel that they're up for it. And you you've indicated in your talks, that you felt that calling, you know, earlier, at the beginning of your career, you know, that you'd always been interested in that state, and you felt like, are those kinds that, you know, effing the ineffable, as Alan Watts put it, unscrewing the inscrutable. So I guess where I'm trying to go with this question is, people that are, hmm, a lot of people are not ever going to use psychedelics. But then there's another whole subset of people in the communities that are the, you know, in the populace, that are working with these. And I'm, I guess, I don't know if they're, you know, like I say, what you could say about this. But you know, the people that are not in that small group of people that are going to do that extremely deep work, do you have any, have you had any kind of thoughts, intuitions, feelings about, you know, how a lot of people can approach the work that needs to be done with the help of psychedelics? Hmm?

Speaker 1  27:20  
Well,

Chris Bache  27:26  
first, you're right that I wrote LSD in the mind of the universe with the hope that it would be read, not only by other psychedelic voyagers. I hope psychedelic voyagers would would read it, and there would be a kind of conversation that would emerge from Voyager to Voyager, back and forth. But I hope that this book would also be read by people who are not interested in taking psychedelics and or who haven't had the opportunity. Because what's important, I think, in so many ways, in the book is the cosmology that emerges, is the visions of reality that emerge in the psychedelic state. And these can be very valuable to people, whether or not they ever touch these experiences themselves, just to see what the understanding of reality that comes forward. And I've had many people write me since the book has come out, and say, I've never taken psychedelics in my life, but I've been a lifelong meditator, and I really relate to what you're saying. I've had many, many similar experiences of collective suffering, for example, or different death and rebirth experiences, but I've never used psychedelics, and that's, of course, what we expect, because psychedelics are simply an amplifier of consciousness. It's consciousness that does the work. So if you work with consciousness in a focused way, then naturally, you're going to have similar experiences in different ways to what emerges in a psychedelic session. Now for people who want to work with psychedelics, sorry, several basic rules of thumb stand out for me. One of them is very, very meticulous attention to set and setting, which, of course, I think is widely understood now, but I would emphasize clarity of intention in creating the conditions of long term engagement. Sometimes our engagement is short by a few months. Sometimes our undertaking is several years of work. But the longer our focused engagement, the more important it is to really set up the shop carefully, to really have your Kiva prepared, both inwardly and outwardly, so that your contact what you want is clean contact and good recall. And clean contact means not obscuring the field with a lot of other things going on or tending to a lot of outside things. Tripping is fine if people want to trip, and a lot of people have life changing experiences trip. Being no criticism there. But if you want to use this for deep inner work, you have to clarify your field, clear it out. And then the second thing that stands out is the importance of retention, the importance of holding on to your experiences, clarifying recording them, either with works of art. Sometimes people do it with music. For me, it's always been the written word, methodologically. This, a lot of the work which is being done, important work being done with psychedelics, is therapeutically focused, aimed at healing the wounds of the personal psyche. And that's really important work, and we're learning a lot about that, particularly now in this renaissance of psychedelics. But that which heals at the therapeutic level, at the personal unconscious level, is also that which opens work experiences deeper into the cosmos itself. It's in renewing our relationship with the universe that heals so much of our wounds of incarnation. And if you are called, or feel called to push the boundaries, I mean, it really is. There are some people who love to climb mountains and lum some people who love to, you know, go deep into the oceans. They just have an adventurous spirit. And I think that also is true for those who want to explore states of consciousness. But it takes a certain personality type, if you will, to you have a certain rigor, a certain capacity to maintain ambiguity, to deal with ambiguity, a certain kind of stability of your social circumstance, because it's not just you who go into these states, but into a degree. Everyone that you are intimately associated with is touched by your work. So you have to make sure your life is grounded and solid that supports the work. And the last thing I would mention is the deeper you want to go into these Non-ordinary states, the more important it is to have a daily spiritual practice. I just have become so convinced of this over the time, because you need a daily spiritual practice to ground first just the energy that's unleashed in these states, and then to ground the experiences the more you learn about mysticism and the more you study the autobiographies of our great saints and sages, the easier it is. I think to have it gives you a touchstone for grounding your more radical experiences.

Stephen Gray  32:37  
You know, it's funny, you mentioned the great saints and all that. And I don't think there's an answer to this, but it's just been on my mind a little bit later, lately that, you know, there are these, you know, kind of pinpoint people over the last couple of 1000 years that you know we hear about. I don't remember all the names, but you know, St John of the Cross, St Francis, Meister Eckhart and a few of these great mystics that we know about. You know, of course, you know, there are probably many from indigenous traditions that weren't writing anything down. But you know, where are these people now? I mean, are there just too many of us for them to stand out on the planet? Now, like, Where are the people like Ramana Maharshi and these people that seem to have completely gotten it, so to speak.

Chris Bache  33:24  
Yeah, I don't know the answer that question. That's kind of a sociological and historical question. I don't really know the answer. I think that we are that they're more hidden saints than we might appreciate, but I also think, in a fundamental way, I agree with those who have observed that the age of private enlightenment is coming to an end. It's already come to an end, and it's not like individual you know, enlightenment work is not important. It is important, but we have entered into a time of history where we need to draw the whole human species needs to enter into the Enlightened condition. The whole human species needs to really get at the roots of what's holding us in this tight configuration of ego. Because the world, the civilization that we are in now, is a civilization built by the ego, and the ego is ultimately a cut off psychological entity. We don't experience our common ground with other beings, and we don't experience our common ground with the universe itself. It's a fragmented condition, and it builds a fragmented universe. And right now, the fragmentation of our universe is threatening the very vitality of the lives of the all life on our planet. So I think we are moving into a time where the real impetus is collective transformation. And that's a that I think is kind of taking us into a different level of the game than we were in for the. Last 2000 years.

Stephen Gray  35:01  
Yeah, well, put beautifully, but yeah, my old Buddhist teacher that I mentioned earlier, chugyam, Trungpa. I don't you probably know more about this than I, than I do as a concept, but I think there are different uses of the word term arhat. But wait, Trungpa talked about it was he, he was critical of what he called the arhat mentality, which was the enlightenment for self kind of mentality, was the way he described it. Yeah. So, you know, I completely agree with you. So perhaps that leads in, for me, anyway, into this discussion of the sort of great death and great awakening that you talk about in your work and that you explored in those journeys, and yeah, the probably the primary motivation for me doing this YouTube channel series altogether, is because of the kind of things you were just talking about, that we've reached a karma, a kind of karmic comeuppance point where the that fragmented ego mentality has brought the planet to place where it's not sustainable to continue in this direction anymore. So I'm wondering if you could explore and talk a little bit about I know one thing that you've mentioned in your talks is that you weren't given a timeline on this. There was no 2012 involved. But it sounds to me like I don't know. An image I've been using occasionally is a boat coming down a river toward a whirlpool, or you might use the term vortex. And you know at first, when the when, when the boat first gets pulled into the into the orbit, as it were, of the of the vortex. It's going around the outer edge kind of slowly, but then it's gradually getting pulled. The strength becomes of the pull becomes increasingly strong and rapid, and it seems to me where we're well into that vortex. Now, I don't know, do you? Can you comment on that?

Chris Bache  36:59  
Yeah, well, this was a great surprise for me in my work, because when I began this work, I was thinking that this was thinking in terms of a model of individual transformation. I was doing this work to transform and improve my my private self in some way, and that was shattered after two years. The game changed. It was it was not about that. And about four years into the work, I began to be given a series of visions that continue to unfold over over 50 sessions. And the the theme of these visions was always humanity's collective transformation. They were consistent in in over over time. And the message was, humanity was coming to a point of a before and after point in history, of a decisive transformation, of an evolutionary jump in the quality of of consciousness that we would be living out of and through just just an exponential a time of great blessing, a time of great grace, of great illumination, of great healing. And these visions came for years, but I was never shown in these early years how nature was going to pull this off, because when I looked around me, it didn't look like that was what was happening. And it looked like for every indicator that we were getting better, there were other indicators that we were getting worse, more insanity, more greed, more corporate control and and then in 1995 I was given a very, very deep session, a series of visions, and I was taken into the future. Time became very horrible, permeable. In my sessions, I I entered into multiple modalities of trans temporal experiences. And in this I entered into the deep future, and I experienced what I came to understand was the death and rebirth of our entire species in some collective historical crescendo, and I experienced it not as crisp Bache, individual self looking on, and not even as a spiritual aspect of crisp based looking on. By this time, I had dissolved so many times and so deeply into the collective mind that I experienced this crisis as a ask the species. I experienced it literally as a rippling of crisis arising within the collective psyche, and I experience a time of tremendous suffering, a time of things falling apart, of loss of control, of of human beings losing more and more of the constants of their world. It the image that comes to mind is of a hurricane that's coming over. Over a small island which is just threatening all life on the island. And for a time, in my experience, I thought we were going to go extinct. I thought we were heading into an extinction event. But then at the peak time, the storm passed, and humanity began to recover, to pick themselves up, and when we began to pick ourselves up, something extraordinary happened. In the process of going through this crisis, we were changed. I think it's our heart was broken open, in a way, there was some kind of deep transformation. When the pain became so terrible, we we began to make choices that we weren't willing to consider making. At an earlier time of stability, in such extreme instability, we began to make different choices. And when we were past the worst of this crisis, there was a tremendous kind of up surging of new values, new insights, new ways of being, new ways of organizing. And if there were one fundamental theme that emerges, it is the theme of oneness. We had an experience deep in our psyche of oneness that permeates all existence, and that's a tremendous spiritual revitalization. And then subsequently, in other sessions, I was taken deep into deep time and given an experience of what I came to call the future human that that is this is a change which is not going to simply precipitate a political restructuring or an economic restructuring or a social restructuring. It's a change which is going to reach so deeply into the collective psyche that it actually causes an evolutionary flip of the archetype of the blueprint, or the archetypal blueprint of the human psyche, so that there is literally a an emerging, an emergence of A restructured core around which our individual lives crystallize in time. I came and just to touch this future human, to go into deep time and just to touch it was such a clarifying experience. It was so gratifying, because this magnificent humanity, with its heart healed of all the pain that we've caused each other through time, and that has been caused in us by nature, a tremendous illumination of the human mind. It was truly an enlightened species that was emerging out of this process. And this has been this, I think, gave the larger context for my entire life and my understanding of history that we are in right now. It gave a context which helped me understand why my individual enlightenment fell away as insignificant, and that my sessions went for years aiming at collective transformation and trying to support this collective transformation wherever possible. It did not give me any timeline, as you said, it did not give me any specifics. It did not tell me when, where or how, but the certainty and the magnitude of this convulsion seemed to be driven by some kind of global ecological crisis that triggered a global systemic crisis, crisis of global systems, which then I began after I began to have these experiences, I began to do my ecological homework. I began to read more widely in the ecological literature, to pay attention to the people who've been tracking these things, and I think it's clear, and I give the references in the book, that we are coming to a critical time in human evolution. We are on the verge of losing the planet if we don't change our ways, and we don't seem to be changing our ways nearly fast enough to avoid a crisis of unprecedented proportions. So I had these experiences, oh, 1985 to 1999 you know, 20 years ago, and it seems that these are unfolding now that we are entering increasingly a time of ecological plague, in a way, a time of great, great ecological uncertainty coming at us, devastation coming at us in global climate change. In this context, I watch covid 19, and I don't see it as the true crisis of this. Era. It seems to be too small a crisis, but it's a serious crisis, and it's a crisis that, if we respond to it well, it could teach us many things that we will need when the deeper crises emerge, which are coming in the decades ahead. And I think, I think it is teaching us, I mean it. There are those who are learning from it, and then those who are just trying to quickly get back to normal as quickly as possible. But I think, I think normal we're going to find is farther and farther irretrievable. We now have no choice but to go into a new future and to find our way into this new future. And I think the divine, or whatever you want to call the intelligence of the universe, the creative capacity of the universe, is pulling us that way. It supports us as we cooperate with this crisis. It's taking us somewhere that it wants us to go,

Stephen Gray  45:57  
beautiful, yeah, yeah, yeah. I've the, I've, I've kind of had the same intuition about the covid situation. It's kind of a fantasy. I suppose you could say in my mind that that you know the gods as it were, whatever that is, as you say, the divine there. I don't know how this functions, of course, and how hands on they would be with our journey. But it I could almost imagine that there that the covid situation is kind of like letting us down step by step, like, here's what can happen when there's a great disruption. And as you say, You know what? What kinds of changes in our individual mentalities and the way that we do things collectively might come out of this? And you know, of course, that remains to be seen. But you know, I have a feeling that at the very least, you know the whole world has been quieter and cleaner for a while. And, you know, even if people, I mean, I could be completely wrong about this, but I wonder if you know that, even if people don't really consciously, kind of pay attention to, you know, the implications of that, it's, it's gotten in under their skin on some level. You know, birds are more audible. There may be more of them around, you know, the air is cleaner. The pace of life has been slower. I'm seeing so many people riding bicycles around my neighborhood, you know, I'm hoping that more of them will, you know, many of them will continue to ride those bicycles. And people are jogging like nothing, like nobody's business around my neighborhood lately. You know, they're going to come, you know, when people get back to their quote, unquote, normal life, I think a lot of people are going to find that they've come back rested, healthier. They've probably been eating more at home, cooking more at home. It's hard to find yeast in the stores around making east, you know, but at the same time, you know, the way you describe this great death, you know, trajectory sounds pretty frightening in a sense, you know. And I guess to what comes out to my mind, comes into my mind about that is that it's increasingly becoming more and more important for anyone who possibly can to be a rock, as it were, for others. You know,

Chris Bache  48:32  
yeah, it is frightening. It really is frightening. And I think It's therefore important to really understand what's happening. I mean, there are a lot of people who will be calling on the apocalyptic End of Days and all sorts of interpretations. There'll be people be talking about extinction and so on so forth. But I think what's really happening is that we are in labor. This is a birth. Gestation is a long process. It's a nine month process, but labor takes place with 24 hours. It's a very short, very intense process in which we give birth to something new. I think humanity has been gestating the future human for 1000s and 1000s of years, but the process of giving birth to it is really convulsive. And if you walked into a room when there was a woman giving labor right in the middle of it, and she's yelling and screaming and everyone's running around, you would think, Oh, this is terrible. She's going to die. But if you know what's happening, you know that this is labor. This is what labor is like. Well, we are going into a collective labor, I believe, and therefore it's important for us to cultivate an appreciation of what this actually consists of. We are giving birth to a new form of human being, not simply better in a few little ways, dressing up the edges, but a deep reconstruction of the human psyche. Me, and the way I've come to understand this is in terms of the concept of the diamond soul, which is a different image, but basically it refers to other sessions that I went through where I experienced what seemed to be I was given a series of teachings, experiential teachings, about where reincarnation is taking us, you know, and it led me to have an understanding of reincarnation which went considerably beyond the way it's been talked about in the traditional Eastern sources. Because I think basically the idea in traditional thinking of reincarnation, we reincarnate, we reincarnate, we reincarnate. Karma follows us. We make improvements. We get a little bit better and better. We go from third grade to fourth grade to fifth grade, hopefully more compassion, more intelligent, more resourceful, incremental, incremental change. But I think what happens eventually in the reincarnation process, we die and we go into spirit, where we reconnect with soul, the consciousness that holds all of our experience. We're born, we get small, we learn, we die, we get large. We're born, we get small. And we keep this up for 1000s and 1000s of years, only touching our soul, our total consciousness, usually in the afterlife state, in the Bardo state. But if this keeps up, all of us has been going through this for 1000s, 1000s of years, sooner or later, there comes a point where I think all what happened in my sessions, all my former lives, started coming in, and they hit critical mass, they and when they hit critical mass, there was a massive explosion of energy, and they fused. And when they fuse, an extraordinary diamond light broke out of my chest, and it catapulted me into a state of consciousness beyond anything I had been in up to that point. And it was a state of consciousness in which I was an individual, but I was an individual beyond any frame of reference that I had known it previously. And I think what that's what's happening with reincarnation, that there comes a time in history when all of our former lives become integrated. In the early stages, when we integrate our former lives, we often have to deal with leftover pain and problems that have been that are still reside in these former lives. So the emphasis is on healing and clarifying, but eventually, when they when all of that work is done and they fuse into a new singularity, and that singularity, I think, is the birth of the soul in time, so that we permanently shift our identity from the ego of this small, short term body which lives maybe 100 years to the soul which lives and thinks and feels on a much, much larger time horizon. I think this birth of soul consciousness inside time is taking place simultaneously Well, as the planet is trying to come to terms with its divisive history and is trying to deal with problems which it cannot solve at the national level, but can only solve at the global level, As we're trying to come together as one planet. Internally, the players there are trying to come together as one soul, so that there is a reciprocity between the the outer, political, ecological dynamic in the inner, psycho spiritual dynamic, so that, I think the ego is the psychological structure that built this world, and the ego will never be able to solve the problems that we have generated. It takes the expansion of the soul to really have the depth of courage and the depth of compassion and the depth of insight to really carry us into the creation of the next stage of our planetary evolution.

Stephen Gray  54:04  
Yeah, beautifully put again, yeah, yeah. My, my sense of of this passage, I guess you could say, is that it, you know, it is scary, as we were saying that it looks like a lot of things that, you know, people have been able to, you know, hold as status quo and stability are going to be ripped away from us and so on and so on. It's going to be a really challenging time. I guess the hopeful, or more optimistic part of my my mind, adheres to this old saying, necessity is the mother of invention, and it feels like, as we move out of it's like we've been, you know, as, you know, living in, you know, in an illusion, in a sense, you know, in a kind of a collective and individual dream that's virtual, that's based in our thoughts and our you know, it's in our heads and all that. And you know, as Terence McKenna has, and others have. It whistling past the graveyard you know, trying to ignore the you know, the reality of ego death and the spirit that you know, encompasses all. But as we, as these conditions destabilize, I think perhaps one of the amazing thing that's things that's going to come out of this is, you know, because there is such a deep well of creativity and capability in the human species, I think we're going to see a lot of that coming forth. You know that, oh, that's another one of my favorite sayings from Victor Hugo, something to the effect of, there's nothing as powerful as an idea whose time has come, right? Yeah, so I think we're going to see, you know, as as the old ways become less viable, people can put less faith in them, a greater openness to new ideas.

Chris Bache  55:59  
Yes, I think we're experiencing this profound polarization taking place now. There will be forces pulling us very strongly toward the past, towards the divisions of the past, towards the certainties of the past, towards the patterns of the past. And then there will be forces taking us into the future, taking us into something less certain, more unexplored, but, but I think the the juice is going to be with the future, because with the past, if we, if we keep allow ourselves to be pulled into the past and the patterns of consumption and corporate control and so on violence and, you know, placing one race over another, one religion over another, one continent over another that way ends in death. It just ends in death. But a different a future, a collaborative future, working for a world that works for all, working, working where a certain portion of the population has less, so that everybody has more is going to produce a much, much happier, better existence for all of us in the end. And I think we have the courage to make it. I think you know, things like the coronavirus are basically giving us an opportunity to flex our courage, to flex our wisdom and to say no when we're being told lies by people who represent the past, people who represent, you know, the faded wisdom of patriarchy, the faded the you know The unspeakable shame of ego, and we see it dramatized on the body politic today, you know, and that just leaves a sour taste in our mouth. Where, when we see courage, when we see compassion, when we see wisdom, insight, working for our collective good, that we recognize and say, Yes, I want to be like that. I want to support those forces.

Stephen Gray  58:04  
Yeah, so again, hopefully that, you know, as Leonard Cohen put it, there's a crack in everything. That's how the light gets in, that the light will be coming in. And, you know, I read some of the channeled books that were popular back in the late 80s and early 90s. And one guy that I kind of liked more than others was a guy named Ken Carey. He had a book, a couple of books called star seed, Millennium and things like that. And one of the things that, assuming this was actually channeled, that his, you know, ch, his source, his entity, was saying, was, these technologies that you have, you know, these communication technologies, they're actually pretty interesting, because you know when, when the information gets to the point where you can, you know, be sending out that, you know, the idea whose time has come. We now have this capability of sharing information instantly around the planet, pretty much, right? It's like a we have these stepping stones, in a sense, now, right?

Chris Bache  59:10  
Yeah, and, and I think what I'm saying and what I'm describing if, if it were just me having these experiences, and then it would be maybe not that significant. But a lot of people have been having these experiences and sharing these ideas. They've been seeing the same thing. A lot of psychedelic voyagers have been seeing this basic vision of a time of fundamental historical crisis and choice. Indigenous cultures have been seeing this vision emerging for decades in their work, mystics like and contemplatives, meditators who would never go near psychedelics, have been having this deepening insight that this is a time of crisis, this is a time of where we must grow up. And I think that's one way of looking. At it. This is a time of maturation. We have to grow up and to take responsibilities as adults. And there's a certain way in which we've been living like adolescents, with the qualities of adolescents, but now we need to grow up, and I think we have that capacity, and I really think we will. I think we're going to make this transition, even though it's going to get difficult, I just have confidence in I think, when I'm really feeling deeply uncertain and fearful, I remind myself that the universe has brought us this far, and I know that there are end roads, there are extinction events that are taking place all around us, but I trust that if, if we are entering into a time of such momentous choice and consequences, that we the universe must think that we're ready. And I think I will. So I place my trust in the universe's wisdom, and at least in my sessions, the universe seems to clearly think that we're ready, in that it knows what it's doing, and we will be able to participate in that, knowing

Stephen Gray  1:01:08  
well this is the reason why I'm so happy that you are my initial or inaugurative guest On this hopefully developing series, because that, you know this one, it's, it's, it's central to why I have such respect for you and your work, Chris, is that that it's hopeful. It points out that there, you know who we possibly can be, and that there was a, there is a way to get there, right? You know, there is a little bit like the Four Noble Truths, you know that, that there is a way to get there. You know, there are pathways and and, you know, and as we've been talking about here, you know, people need that kind of, you know, encouragement, that kind of, you know, vision to be shared. You know, as things get, you know, less stable for people that they have less to less ground to hang on to, so I think this is probably a good time to bring it to a close. We've been talking for close to an hour, and I'm clear that you could have a lot more to say on these topics, so we might have to do it again. Actually, it just occurred to me at this very moment, because you're, you're, I'll have to say you're an easy interview, Chris, because I just need to ask one question and articulate it so so clearly and so beautifully. I really appreciate that I'm really moved in my heart to, you know, to hear these kinds of things that you have experienced and that you're sharing with people. So this being my very first one, I don't haven't figured out how to end these yet. I know sometimes people would, you know, say goodbye to the guest and then talk to the talk to the the viewers a little bit, but I think I'll just do that while you're still here, if you don't mind.

Chris Bache  1:03:03  
So so before you do that, and that's fine to do, but first I want to thank you for your initiative, because you've been drawing people together in the conferences that you've been organizing for years now, and your commitment to our collective transformation has been profound, and this continues in this series, your your your vision is for collective awakening. And I just honor that, and just want to thank you for it.

Stephen Gray  1:03:30  
Well, thanks so much for saying that. And yeah, that is the reason, you know, I just feel really connected to that vision. And you know, I another one of my favorite sayings is from Bishop Desmond Tutu, the legendary South African Bishop. And I don't, don't remember the full sentence, but it was something to the effect that a lot of people don't believe in the possibility of possibility, and that that's what we need, is you have to believe in the possibility of possibility. And to my mind, you know the the ego and whatever it is, can cook up all kinds of stories about what's going on, but there's only one attitude that's functional, and that is to believe in the possibility of possibility and do what you need to do your own healing work and participating whatever You can do.

Speaker 2  1:04:19  
Yeah. Yeah, yeah. I think so, yeah.

Stephen Gray  1:04:23  
So it's a wonderful vision. It's a wonderful prayer. And excuse me, do you want to say anything? Is there can people contact you? Or is there anything to say about that?

Chris Bache  1:04:35  
Well, actually, I'm embarrassed that I haven't gotten my website finished yet. I hopefully it will be up in a month or so. It will be Chris bache.com will be where people will be able to find me online right now. They can find me if they go to my articles and publications, if they go to academia.edu and sign in. There, they'll be able to find me under Chris M Bache and everything I've written, and many of the podcasts are there, but Chris bache.com soon will be where people can reach me, and they can also reach me at my university website. My address, C, M Bache, at y, s, u.edu

Stephen Gray  1:05:23  
I should be able to put little tabs up on the screen at some point. Yeah, show those for people, and in the meantime, just so they know. Well, I think maybe it's showing on the screen. It does on mine when I'm speaking and when you're speaking. But it's spelled B, A, ch, E, yes. It's not necessarily an intuitive spelling and pronunciation match. Yeah, yeah. So again, the book that we're talking about more than any you know, he's got other works, as I mentioned at the beginning, is this one. It's it's incredible. It's really remarkable. And there's so much more in this book that we didn't cover today. So I hope people will go and find this book. It's going to be, it already is and will continue to be part of this kind of transformation that we're talking about. So yeah, I guess Thank

Chris Bache  1:06:16  
you, Steven, really. Thank you very much. Thank you for the conversation. Thank you for the opportunity to bring these ideas forward to your listeners,

Stephen Gray  1:06:23  
and you do it so well, Chris, really, you know, I know you're humble about it, but you know, I could listen to you all day. You really have the you know you're in you're doing the right job. You know you've you found your job, I think because you explain it so, so clearly. So again. Thank you very much. And I'll just say, while you're still here, because I haven't like I say, I haven't figured out quite you know, how I want to end these things, I'll just say that I'm hoping to be able to put a little subscribe button up on here, and I hope people will subscribe to this YouTube channel and share it and so on. And it'll also be on Anchor, which is an audio podcast, I hope. Well, once I figure it out, we'll strip the audio off of the video and put it on Anchor as well. So again, much, much. Thanks. From the Heart, Chris, take care.

Chris Bache  1:07:16  
Bye, bye, my friend. You. You.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
