Chris Bache  0:00  
You. Well, hello, Richard. It's good to continue our discussion. You know, in our previous discussion, we sort of started the discussion of reincarnation. We looked at the evidence for reincarnation, these extraordinary children from around the world. We began to unpack that evidence into a deeper understanding of the rhythms of life and the stages of human evolution that reincarnation makes possible the restoration of the theme of the meaningfulness of the challenges that we find embedded in our life, and the opportunity to actually deepen our therapeutic interventions in the places where we are stuck, the places where we're Holding pain that are rooted in our deeper history. So now, today, we take it farther. We begin to look deeper into the significance of what are we? What's the significance of the fact that we are reincarnating beings in a universe that obviously supports and nurtures and created this reincarnation dynamic.

Richard Rudd  1:24  
That's a huge difference, isn't it like to to be in a to be in a living in a universe that is nurturing us, you know, that has a kind of paternal maternal energy, you know, surrounding it, that has such a different, such a different framework to be born into

Chris Bache  1:43  
Yeah, yes. And, you know, I want to mention at the outset that sometimes reincarnation thinkers go in a direction of of thinking that every little bitty thing in our life has a determined quality, a deterministic quality. But I don't think we necessarily need to go there, because chance is one of the powerful elements of this universe. And so we can affirm meaning, and we can affirm intentionality without putting every detail of our life into that press and ask, well, what's the meaning of this and what's the meaning of that? To affirm a larger scope of meaning. Still, in a world where there are chance and there are variables and there are uncertainties, what's important, I think, is understanding that the universe pays attention to how we respond to chance events as well as intentional events, that our learning and the quality of our response is carried forward, and does this credit, regardless of the origin of the challenges that we're facing.

Richard Rudd  2:49  
Yeah, absolutely, I just, funnily enough, today, recorded a short meditation and and in it, I I asked people to kind of imagine the universe with its with it, with crisscrossed by its fields of karma, you know, of like, you know this, like, almost these, these ley lines through time and space that kind of have this karmic energy. They're rippling. And the whole of the cosmos is rippling with these fields. And then I asked each person, well, whoever's meditating to send out one really beautiful thought, like just just from the depth of their souls, send out a really beautiful thought into that, and see the universe respond to that, and see how it enters the field, and how the universe maybe kind of sighs and expands and, and how it reaches every single tiny area and almost like it opens up synapses, yes, in some way, and, and just the the power of the incalculable power of something like that, you know, dropped into the into the ocean of, you know, time, space, yeah, and, and, you know, I found that, like a really powerful contemplation to do,

Chris Bache  4:09  
yeah, absolutely. I agree that's been very much my experience in my own work with psychedelics, that there were, there was nothing that I did working at deep levels that was mine alone, that was private, and that the pain came from a larger collective web, and the healing spread out into a larger collective web. And that really, those exercises, the meditations that you're describing, I think, really are important for changing the sort of a tilt and how we live in the universe, because according to just our physical senses, we have this feeling often that life happens to us. Life is something independent to of us, and then it just happens to us, and then we're victims of it, and we respond. But when you begin to send out energy into the universe, when you begin to send out healing and love into the universe. You watch the universe respond in immediate and then indirect ways. Then you begin to shift into the sense that you are living in a dynamic field. You are part of a dynamic field, living in a field and at a very deep level, on the subtle level, you are creating your universe as you go once you begin to understand that still it doesn't mean you're free of all the karma that's coming at you from the past. It's still working its way through the system, but increasingly, the balance of your life tilts from being kind of the passive recipient of things that you personally didn't start to being the generator of the life that you are inheriting now.

Richard Rudd  5:44  
Yeah, you're no longer a victim. You're, you're, you're a creator. Yeah, yes, we got this great question. We thought we kind of inject into this talk, which is what happens to us when we die. So shall we? Let's explore that. I mean, you know, other, many other cultures we, I think we wanted to mention the Tibetans, because they seem to really have a handle on some of these things, Egyptians as well. But you know, Tibetans perhaps a little bit more contemporary, because they're still here, practicing very much those, those teachings, the Bardo teachings and

Chris Bache  6:23  
psychotherapists are now exploring this territory. Joel whittens first book, Life between life explored this and Michael Newton's work. In his books, journey of souls and destiny of souls are very systematic attempts to explore through deep states of regression, of spiritual regression, what happens to people when they go through the death process? So really, we've got two halves of life. We've got birth to death, and then we've got birth a death to birth and missing this side. But really, you have to understand the whole circle to really understand what happens. So, yeah, let's jump into it. Yeah.

Richard Rudd  7:04  
So obviously, the, you know, the Tibetans, have coined this phrase, the Bardo. The Bardo, which is this in between state or but it can also be used to describe a transformational experience, you know, because that's life is filled with transformational experiences, but particularly when you're moving through a threshold, across a threshold, you know, like death or birth, are classic thresholds and and they sit there as kind of almost an allegory of all transformation, don't they? Death and birth? So, you know, because we have so many deaths and births even within one lifetime. So it seems like a kind of obvious logic to expand that allegory out beyond individual births, and you know, and and and see it everywhere, throughout the entire cosmos. And I know you've experienced this very profoundly in your in your psychedelic journeys, like this constant you've described, like those constant states of transformation that, or you've been through them in those, I mean, you know what? I'm this constant rebirth.

Chris Bache  8:15  
Yeah, the yes. I mean, when I started the work, I thought there was just one death, ego death, that would then launch you into the spiritual universe. But what I found is, course, the spiritual universe has many, many layers to it, and just because you're operational at certain layers doesn't mean you're operational yet at deeper layers, and you actually have to go through another metamorphosis of death and surrender to be reborn into that another layer, and so on and so forth. And that reflects the Tibetan idea of Bardo. Bardo really means a discrete layer of consciousness, and so when they're describing the after death journey, there are multiple Bardos that manifest themselves. Now we in the West have tended to use the term Bardo to expand on that, and basically let the Bardo represent the sum total of all things that happen to us when we die on the other side. And that's a perfectly acceptable use of the term, but their use of it is in terms of stages of that progression. So there's one Bardo you pass through. Another Bardo you pass through. There's the Bardo of the hungry ghost to the Bardo, the heavenly spirits and things like this. But the basic pattern, I think, that they identified is the same pattern that the psychotherapists are identifying too, that when we die, we go through a period of reunion with our soul, with our and our soul lineage, and the first thing that takes place is that we debrief from our most recent life. We basically process the life that we just lived in the context of absolute love, and a love so deep is not even a matter of forgiveness, but. We experience the totality of our life, all of our shortcomings, all of our good deeds, in the context of infinite love, and we have the opportunity to look at our life and see what we did well and see what we didn't do well.

Richard Rudd  10:16  
And we had the whole notion, don't we have, like the life flashing before you as you die, like this kind of replay in tight in the timeless dimension. No, because there's so it makes perfect sense, like for us to go through that deep reflection at the end of something, and it's what we do in life, right? Yeah. So, yeah,

Chris Bache  10:39  
I think the Near-Death Experience of the life review is a snapshot of what happens, kind of in a full death experience of just a detailed reliving of every detail, every nuance, far more details than we can keep track of inside time and space, and we See how our life rippled out and touched other people. We experience how our evil deeds hurt and how our good deeds helped. And so we experience the totality of our life in the seamless fabric,

Richard Rudd  11:13  
and we experience them without a physical body. So we experience them in a subtle body, which is much more intense, yeah, like the astral body, or, as it's so called, or the mental body, the subtle layers, the causal body, you know, the without the physicality, the intensity of those emotions that we probably feel, or we review, yeah, have given rise to this notion of, like, eternal damnation from, you know, the Christians, for example, or or even, like the eternal bliss realms of the Buddhas, Buddhists, or heaven and hell. And, you know, because there's this sense of eternity, I think it's a correct intuition. You know that, because when there's no time when that when you're out of time and space, in that sense, you're in that place of grace, then then an experience of, you know, of the harm you've caused, or the hurt you've caused, could feel like it, you know, in that moment, in that timeless space, could feel like it's infinite. You know, I've caused, like, an intense pain, and then seeing the ripple of that pain into a life, and how it, how it carries on through that being, yeah, and then finally gets worked out. I mean, I don't know what level we experience, but I imagine we experience a lot of the of the subtler dimensions of our karmic, you know the passions of our karma, but pretty, very intense,

Chris Bache  12:47  
yeah. But then what locks in this experience, this phenomenology of eternity, what locks it in as a metaphysical principle, is the mistaken view that we only live once, so we've had our chance, and there's absolutely no chance to correct it. So if you're going to be accountable, and if you're going to, you know, be accountable to good and you've screwed up, then you're punished forever and ever and ever and of course, fortunately, no one finds that when they actually get into the the deep, the depth of it, the past life therapists don't find that. The Buddhists don't find that that we do, we are accountable, we are responsible. We do experience the pain we cause others, but that's so that we can learn, and that's so that we can come back and do better next time and better next time and grow and grow. Yeah.

Richard Rudd  13:39  
I mean, I'm from a lineage of of of distillers in my family, and so I like the, you know, I look at it intuitive. This is my intuitive reading of, perhaps, you know, a colorful way of maybe what, how this happens is that there's a, there's a distilling process and in and in that or a fermentation of some form, so that the grosser matter starts to fall down back to Earth in a way like this. Is the notion of having these subtle bodies, where the lower bodies, the astral, you know, those lower en energies that we've created, fall back into the lower planes, and then something higher gets crystallized, the distillation of our life. All that was good about it, all that we've learned, is being distilled into this pure, kind of Quintessence that then stays as a and adds to us, our soul's trajectory. But then, but then the lower, all that kind of elemental energy that sinks back into those lower planes of being. They, they also carry our karma, you know. So those, those droplets, if you like, of karma, sink back down and they, they, you know, we still have to redress them, you know, although they, they, my understanding is that they move into the. Collective field as well. So every act that we or every word we speak, let's say, or every thought we have, goes into the collective so the you know, it's we are all co creating the the karma of humanity, the collective karma of humanity. Yeah. And then we have to return to, to pick up where we left off. But we have this enhanced soul, you know, this, this, this, you know, that we've learned from. So when we return, there's more awareness present. So there is this continuity, you know, and and and we and we know, the other way I see it is that there's, you know, our lives are trajectories. They're like arcs that I see there's an arc, it's like an arc. It's curving. It's always moving, if you looked at it. But it might be a spiral, or it might have one of these Kundalini shapes underneath it, not a straight line, and that, that is what we that's what never ends that arc. We follow that arc, and it goes through this portal and it continues. And that's the lineage, that is what if you're able to trace that arc in your inner being, then you can trace your lineage, where you've come from and where you're going, and your memory can travel down that arc. Your awareness can travel down that arc, which enables you to remember or to predict, in the case of Tibetans, you know, to predict where you'll return. Yeah, because, because the awareness is aware of the of the arc, not just in its own life. Because if you, if you look at an arc like in within one life, it may do that. But then if you can see it, if you can project it beyond this life, you can then you know, your awareness can predict intuitively where you're coming back. Can even, maybe even further than predict. Maybe you can even create, you know, where you would are going to return in some respect. So anyway, that's those are ideas.

Chris Bache  17:06  
Yeah, you know, I've never been very interested in tracing my genealogy, but I have been interested in tracing the genealogy of my soul, yeah, which is what you're describing, just reaching back, and basically what you might think of as deep remembering, remembering who you are, who you have been and there. And when you do that, you do have a certain sense of trajectory, of kind of developmental process. And you're pointing to the collective, I think, is absolutely right. What we're what we're learning is the individual and the collective are evolving together. They are functionally separate systems, but they are deeply intertwined. So everything we are doing as an individual seeds the growth of the collective, and everything the collective is doing seeds the growth of the individual, so that when I leave, I really do believe that when I leave space time when I die, and even if I were to leave the entire system altogether, all of my experiences, all of your experiences, will be held in perfect and perfect, I won't say duplication, because we are human beings, and everything we experience, the human species gets to hold on to, and therefore our life experience becomes part of its life experience. Our love and understanding becomes part of its love and understanding, and it is part of its generative matrix, out of which it gives birth to the next generation of human beings. So it's a it's a both hand situation

Richard Rudd  18:38  
here. It's beautiful, like the notion of the Akashic field that is just the red that is constantly remembering and growing. I love that idea, yeah. And you know that the another idea I really like is the notion that comes from the Tibetans as well, this notion they call Tarma, yeah, which my interpretation of it is a word I might use is transmission. It means treasure. And term are like teachings in a way or wisdom, teachings that are kind of waiting for specific teachers in time and space. And the story that is through the Tibetans is that they would a lot of the tama would were that their lineage Tama were dropped by their great teacher, Padmasambhava, who was the second Buddha. And he kind of emanated these Tamas into the future. And like dropping them like, kind of a bit like depth charges, you know, at different levels of depths of time, and that they would go off at certain points where, where, where further emanations or disciples of his or teachers, or really, they're kind of aspects of his greater consciousness, or of that being, that lineage, you could say. But. So to say. And then they would pick up, and they would, they would go off and be, be discovered at certain times, in certain places and periods. And this was a great, a big under it was a big shift in my understanding when I really understood about these tema because that's sort of what happened to me. I had this kind of opening up, that was just hanging there in time and space, and then this wisdom memory came rushing through me, and then I had to spend the rest of my life, and I still am figuring out what I'd received and and living according to it. And I think that's an, it's I mentioned it not just because it's part of my my story, but because it's a, it's a lovely little sort of idea of how, how subtle and rich are the layers that that survive time and space, that kind of, you know that. And it brings us, perhaps, to that notion of involution that we that we've been thinking about, yeah, which maybe we could dive into that. But what is involution? Chris, tell us?

Chris Bache  21:04  
Well, first of all, I want to, I want to stop for a moment, and first to celebrate your receiving of the terma, of the gene keys. You didn't make those. You receive those, and you unpack them. You take your responsibility for your half, but you only have half. The other half is like the seed that comes from above. And once you understand that reincarnation is a cycle that has a bottom half, an incarnational half, and a top half, and just as there are a community of beings in the bottom half of the cycle, there's also a community of beings in the top half that there's layers and layers and layers of spiritual beings. It's not just reincarnating human beings, but there's angelic presences and enlightened beings, presences and all sorts of beings who are here to help us gestate in our gestational cycle. And so just as there are human beings above to help us. There are the teachings above to help and infuse our teaching so that there are these gems of ideas, gems of empowerment, that and so once we have the understanding that a human being who becomes aware of the dynamics of reincarnation, aware of the deep evolutionary trajectory of the soul and soul communities, the way the Tibetans have. Then they naturally begin to track their great beings through time, and they track the great teachings through time, and they become sensitive to these diamonds dropping in to our minds. It's specific. And the deep, the deep, significant patterns to this process. So for me, in addition to the detail of the of these ideas, of that there are term as teachings, and that there are tulkus, you know, read, self consciously reincarnating beings. The deeper fabric is to understand, begin to understand the depth and the grandeur at which reincarnation is operating. It's not simply a matter of who we were in the 17th century, and it's really a matter of it changes the parameters of our dialog with the universe, and therefore it changes our sense of what we are, because we are a being that travels through time. We are a being that has absorbed has been in the spiritual world many times, and we are incarnating more and more of these diamond teachings into our body, into our heart, into our mind. And that opens up the that opens up the playing field of human experience. I think it just opens up and, you know, we I teach at a university where the religion of secular enlightenment is that the universe appeared by chance. It's been driven by random mutation. There's no meaning to your life. It's all accidental. And when you die, you're dead. That's it. When your brain stops, you're dead. And that just completely it just is such a crushing philosophy. But this which starts on an empirical basis but then expands through a deeper appreciation of the dynamics of spiritual traditions. It restores meaning back to our lives. It allows us to play in a meaningful landscape of engaging the wisdom of our life with the wisdom of the universe entering. And the involution is that downward flow of meaning and purpose and beauty and truth into our life. And then evolution is our taking it and seeding it and growing it as best we can into the circumstances of our life.

Richard Rudd  24:59  
We. Yeah, beautiful. I mean, I sometimes look at evolution as the future burrowing into the past, and evolution as the past spiraling towards the future like so you've got these two forces, but you might also look at it as you know, like Aurobindo. You know who I know. You also love Sri Aurobindo, amazing kind of mind, and how he, you know, he describes involution as as seeds, kind of sown deep within matter. So within matter, the spirit is there asleep, like, take a rock, like a piece of lump of granite, or a volcano or a mountain, you know, inside that mountain is, is a sleeping kind of consciousness of such beauty. But it's, it's just waiting. It's waiting for its time, you know. And everything, like a plant, has it, and you can see a little bit more of it in a plant, and in a bird, you can see it more clearly, like it's, it's taking animation. And then a mammal, it's like even more, because it looks at you in the eyes, and it has, even some of them have, you know, have that emotional flavor that humans have, like dogs and horses. And then in the human it's, it's much more like obvious, because you can, you know, we can do this. So the spirit is, you know, there's that notion that it's in like, like this, the this, the gems that you speak of, like everything is a gem in matter. Every tiny atom contains the seed of a spiritual truth, yeah, and it's just everything is waiting its time. Everything is on this evolutionary ladder and and where evolution meets, evolution is kind of the eternal Now, yes, just constantly, as you said, constantly creating and just recreating itself, and also from the notion of involution and evolution, you can, you can solve at some way. I don't know if that's the right word, but you can, you can penetrate the the old chestnut of free will and determinism. Because if you look at it from the involution perspective, you might say, well, it's all predetermined, because it's all just sitting there waiting for its moment to come alive. But from the view of evolution, nothing is predetermined. Everything is like being created on you know, from this view. So the two of them together, like a funnel meeting, are like this. That's the paradox for me, of you know, that's divine science that Aurobindo, by the way, just, you know, really nailed. I mean, if, if you're able to read him, which, which, not the challenges. Like the layers of subtle nuance in that man's mind stream in terms of how he penetrated this information is extraordinary. Yes, I know he's inspired both of us.

Chris Bache  27:56  
And yes he has, yes he has, yeah, and I think you're right. I think in some ways, it's our everyday experience that there are aspects of our life which are highly conditioned, and it's our everyday experience that we are not completely subservient to those conditions. We have a cubic centimeter of free will, which we can expand into a cubic meter of free will. We choose how we choose to meet the circumstances of our life, whether we incubate choice, incubate a space where we look at the options and really examine deeply what we want to do, what we want to be and enact out of that choice, and that's something we can expand on. I mean, that's that's how I sort of see what you're doing in gene T's and correct me if I'm wrong, you're helping people make more informed choices by giving them an opportunity to sit deeply with the core, the karmic core, the swirl of their being. So they make choices on how to engage and define the outcome of that

Richard Rudd  29:10  
exactly because you have in jinkies is very simple, actually, because you have these three layers that, you know, Shadow gift and city and city is, that is the is the involving seed, you know, or the way I describe it often actually is, it's the shadow is the seed, the gift is in the center, is the fruit, is the is the flower, and then the city is the fruit, and the fruit also contains the seed. Yeah, so there's this whole process of awakening inside us, where the shadow suddenly you know our what we learn from our karma, what we learn from our mistakes, what we learn from our challenges, becomes this incredible treasure that you know, and as we unlock it and forgive ourselves and you. Learn and evolve. Then, you know, we begin to, we begin to kind of access those heightened states of consciousness. They're actually buried in the in those very dense places in creation. And that's our role as humans, to kind of find those dense places and be an intermediary to help unlock them, you know, so that you know that's an incredible responsibility.

Chris Bache  30:23  
Yeah, my sense is, over the course of long time, the shadow the shadow seeds become less. They get evaporated, yeah, in the process of reflective awareness and so the creative seeds become more and the opportunity to become increasingly transparent to the intelligence of the universe increase. And if we extrapolate that, if that's true, not only for us individually, but collectively, I mean, and clearly the human race has a long way to go before it makes all of its shadow seeds, because it seems like we have so many shadow seeds that are driving us now. But if we just step back and give the benefit of the doubt and assume that what happens for the individual, which we've seen, can happen for the collective, and that humanity as a whole is in the process through these magnificent, deep collective dynamics of cooking its past seeds and transcending its the limitations of its past and moving forward in time, then we have reasons to hope that What the greatness of beings that we see in tulkus into intimate dialog with Termas is something that all of humanity is aspiring to, and all of humanity can become, that, that we can become. We are in the process of becoming a truly a species of enlightened beings, a species where we live in the light more than living in the shadows. I think we're coming out of the shadows of history into a deeper, deeper, better tomorrow,

Richard Rudd  32:16  
particularly as we start to understand the universe a little bit more or or, or the parameters of the universe, and we look out, you know, I know you've got some wonderful slides you want to share, but which I think would be a great backdrop if you want to share them.

Chris Bache  32:31  
When I when I think about the topics that we're talking about today, like, where is reincarnation taking us? What is the larger scope and purpose of rebirth. I turn I just collect these pictures from the NASA. They send them around every day, and I collect them, and I meditate on these pictures. I try to envision the enormous distances involved and the millions and billions of stars that are involved, and the life that's burgeoning on so many of these planets in so many of these systems, so that the sheer fertility, the profligate fertility of the universe, and the scale that the universe is thinking of in order to create and to manifest orders and orders and orders of evolving life on this magnitude, and then to appreciate that We are part of this, this has been the great, great burden of a one time through metaphysics, the belief that we that this genius and beauty that we're seeing in these pictures, if our life is meaningless and if it's all random chance, we don't get to participate in this greatness. But if reincarnation is true, and if we are really not limited by the time that this little body lives, and if our mind is going to grow for countless, countless, countless incarnations, then we become intimately part of the generative creativity that we see around us in these vast, magnificent images

Richard Rudd  34:31  
of the universe, and this then becomes our playground. You know, you know, without the physical body, this is surely where we live. This is our playground, and it could be even within the physical body, you know, at some deep level, and as a hologram, you know that could be a deep truth that we come to. You know that, as above, so below truth, yeah, and I know you've experienced. Some of that yourself and your experience, your you know, journeys, and so have I. That's a fundamental truth I hold at the core of my being, that you know and and in my teachings, also I we have this profile called a hologenetic profile. And I name it that because it is, it is a map of the, you know, of the inner workings of our being. But it, it kind of it. It has a fractal reality that corresponds way beyond, you know, this microorganism here, of of one body. It is replicated throughout the cosmos. Yeah. So, yeah, a lot of the great alchemical teachings of, you know, the Taoists, for example, have explored this in their deep, you know, studies of and meditations, where you go within and you find the galaxies and the stars and where they exist, in the in the glands of the body, and how everything has a correspondence, ya know, and and, and therefore knowing those correspondences allows your awareness to travel into that reality and outside your physical body. You know that that's you know, as many people have well experienced that in dreams or in astral projection or deep meditation or psychedelic journeying. I mean, feel free to share some of your experiences in that.

Chris Bache  36:35  
Well, you know, I've done that as carefully as I can in my book, LSD, in the mind of the universe. But I think the invitation is to appreciate, I mean, look, we only became conscious of the mother universe about 5000 years ago. We began to have be sufficient discipline to drop beneath the conditioning of our of our individual egoic mind and to tap into that stream of consciousness that we share with all life. We've been walking upright for 5.8 million years. We've only we've been operating with our larger brain about 200,000 years. Writing came in about 5000 years ago, the Upanishadic breakthroughs came in about three, 4000 years ago. But these are nothing compared to the billions and billions of years that lie ahead of us. We're just waking up. We're just waking up to who we are, and so naturally, we kind of get confused given the enormity of what we're growing into. But I think the meditation exercises that you're describing and those philosophical and spiritual traditions which have begun to recognize the correspondence between the above and the below, naturally we begin to enter into exercises where we intentionally sort of reinforce the hybrid nature of our life, that we are a spiritual being and we are physical being. We are both pure light and we are pure green, and there are correspondences in our body which correspond to the correspondence that the realities out there, and the more we can internalize and reinforce them and strengthen them in our meditational exercises, then we become a more conscious mixing pot, a more conscious kind of Mortal and pestle, integrating the above and the below. And if we keep this up for a few 10s of 1000s of years and a few millions of years, I mean, I sometimes would tell my students, only serious question we should be asking ourselves is, what do you want to be in a million years? Because you're going to be here in a million years. So let's get down to it. What is our deepest hearts desire? What can we

Richard Rudd  39:07  
do? The fundamental question I heard a couple of weeks ago, I heard a really interesting talk by Roger Penrose. You know him? Yeah, really imaginative, top level physicist in the world today. And he was saying how, because there was this this, there's this notion that universe is as it's expanding in physics, it's getting further and further apart and slowing down. It's going to reach steady state, and then we're all going to end up in this kind of slightly distant, dead, lonely kind of stopping point. And and he, that wasn't his, that's not his intuition, or at least the way he describes it, is that when you reach that stopping point, it. It's, it's the same as if you've gone incredibly fast, as if you everything's come together again, because one end of the spectrum meets the other end of the spectrum. So you wouldn't be able to tell if things are slowing down. It actually might be that they speak, they look like they're speeding up. And anyway, so he, this is my paraphrasing what he said. But the thing that really blew me away from from a physicist to say was that he said the way he would understand it is that the logic of the and the and the kind of elegance of the universe would be such that that, but that, that kind of condensing point would then give birth to another universe out of itself, like which seems to be the elegant logic that the universe already does. As we started by saying rebirth, and then leads to another birth and another eon. But then he even went further, and he said the background radiation that we see with through our furthest telescopes that can now see like these, the very, very beginnings of the universe. He said, there are certain objects that we're seeing, and then I can't quite remember what he called them, but there are certain shapes and patterns and things that you're seeing, and you see them over and over again. And his, his assumption was that those were the leftovers from the previous eon, from the previous universe that we're seeing and and it that really blew me away. I was like, wow, that's for a physicist who's willing to kind of who's who's kind of reached the top of his game. He's able to kind of take a few leaps. But that really seemed

Chris Bache  41:52  
to me to be I've heard Irvin Laszlo describe the once you reflect on the extraordinary precision of the unfolding of our universe in the Big Bang that just you know, the magnitude of the perfection of the balance of elements that had to be present in the first picoseconds for it to unfold as it has. Then. His hypothesis was, well, do we think that this is the first time the universe has tried this? There have been expansions and contractions and expansions and contraction, and the universe is learning. And perhaps this isn't the first big bang. Perhaps this is the 1000s Big Bang, and it's gotten, it's learned from its previous experiences. And that's that background radiation, the traces which are there,

Richard Rudd  42:48  
and it's constantly ironing out flaws and perfecting and perfecting and perfecting itself, yeah.

Chris Bache  42:55  
But of course, this this wide view. I think it's rich to take the wide view, to take the deep view and to look at very special, developed beings who are kind of pushing the edge of this large view. But I want to bring it back down to Okay. How does this impact me here today? How does this help me live with the immediate problems that I'm dealing with, or the with the immediate choices that I'm living with, you know, and I think it does in the sense that, by it, it's an invitation to look at our life as An intentional, intelligent convocation of circumstances, not as a meaningless and not as an blind, deterministic combination of circumstances, and if we engage our life circumstances as a an intentional challenge, chosen us, chosen for Us, By Us, at a time when we knew more, and we start to make choices in terms of out of a deeper sense of engagement, that our choice does matter, even if we don't see how it changes things immediately, we can trust that it does change things in the Long term, then I think we will find that life changes the circumstances of our life changes things that were hard become soft, things that were bare, and becomes richer. That's your experience, I'm sure. With with Gene

Richard Rudd  44:34  
keys, yeah, and it gives us like, for me, it gives us like, a different kind of backdrop with which to tackle the problems of the world, you know, so the problems that we see today around us that worry us so much, it gives us an empowered view from a much wider view, like to look we've just been looking at. Those cosmic background images. And then you come to the world today, and you look at this tiny, little blue planet with its problems, and, you know? And they're very real, and and they and they, and they're causing a great deal of suffering. They always have done, you know, but they're now more they're more easily seen than ever before, yeah, and we've enacted them globally because of our technology. So we are, you know, it means that for me, I'm constantly reminding people that, you know, action that comes from a state of trust is very different from action that comes from fear. Yeah. So if you can, if we can dive into that field of wider trust, and we begin to make friends with our own death, you know, instead of being, it being something that's kind of, you know, like it's coming, you know, I'm running out of time. Instead of like that view, having this long term view as an individual and and even, like, what I'm doing is as a community, like, as a com, how about if a whole community of people on the same wavelength play with this together, like, we're all going to come back, you know, we're going to return, and we're going to return into this same I mean, that's why I've created these teachings. It's I haven't created. They've appeared because we can come back into them and we can begin to like and the teachings are just the teachings. They're just enable us to kind of give a focal point so that we can do our work, our continuous, progressive, evolutionary work as communities, rather than like, okay, you've done this great work, and then you've gone and, yeah, I might be reborn, but where? Yeah, but if you're reborn into the same community of beings, of souls who are all committed to transmuting karma of the planet, and come in with different gifts and genius and skills in different locations around the world, but we're interconnected through the internet and through a body of teachings that kind of have a resonance in our soul, so we recognize them again, even as a child, you know, and synchronicity helps us to find them. Suddenly we are. It's a different playground again. You know it's like, you don't have to say goodbye to all your loved ones forever. You're you're going to remember them in different way. You're going to bring more of that awareness that through the transitionary Bardo, and bring and the more of us that do that, that incarnate the memory through the Bardos forwards in time. The more it kind of i, this is my my intuition, the more it will open up the Bardos themselves, you know, so that more and more people can remember. And it's all a game of memory. I think that you know, like the more awareness we we the more we play and participate, the more that memory opens up. Because memory is a strange thing, isn't it? Like even individual memory, you can, there are memory tricks you can do to you know, and you can and therapeutically, you can take someone back into their memories, you know. So there are things that you can do to enhance memory, and there are things you can do forwards in time to ensure that you don't forget. You know, there are triggers, you know that you can you know? I mean, there are lots of ways of playing with this, but there are things you can do, as the lamas, do you know the tulkus? You know they they sometimes leave objects that they retrieve in the next life. Yeah, you know. And, and there's lots of tricks within once you know the time that you know, once you kind of found the way through the wormholes. I think you can play more as and then we can bring more and more awakening, you know, into the collective you know. And I think that that changes everything it does.

Chris Bache  49:11  
I think we're shifting slowly from living an ego based life which is grounded in this incarnation to living a soul life which is grounded into this much, much deeper life in the universe. It always struck me as significant that in the classical story of the Buddha's enlightenment, and when he went through the four watches of the night in one of the watches of the night, he saw all of his former lives. They all became living part of his awareness now to see your former lives, to remember your former lives, is not simply to remember who you were, but you bring all of that life experience into who you are. So for me to see, to remember your former lives is. To become the soul which which gathers all that knowledge and all that experience into one place. And when he did that, he became transparent and shattered. He stopped the suffering. And the suffering is fundamentally living, small, living as if this body is the only thing that is you. And I think this is happening historically. We are, as you say, the more we bring that memory forward, the more we live that memory, the more we see that memory into the future. Another way of saying this is to say we are practicing the skills of soul inside time and space. And as our soul gets stronger, we begin to remember and have an intuitive feeling for relationships that we have a deeper history with. And if, if people come at us as enemies, well, let's heal them. Listen, I'm sorry what I did to you, whatever it was, let's get let me make it up to you, but more and more allies come and because there's a waking up is a social process. It's a generative process which has never, ever been private at any time in history. And I think this is what's happening. I think the soul is waking up inside time and space that the human species is basically growing up on a on a scale the likes of which is really comparable about like 200,000 years ago, when we made the jump to our bigger brain, except now the physical plant isn't changing, but the awareness that is supported by the physical plant seems to be changing exponentially. So I know that you and I share a vision of history that we're entering into a very, very challenging time of a time of darkening shadows. So I hope in our next conversation, we can begin to put together our understanding of the dynamics of this period of history that we're venturing and the dynamics of soul growth that

Richard Rudd  52:13  
we both affirm so deeply. Yeah, and how those two fit perfectly together, what you've called The Birth of the diamond soul. And I also happen to call it the diamond awareness, yeah, and it is that memory that transcends the lifetimes and and, yeah, that maintaining that memory between lives. It shows, I mean, for one thing, you know, suddenly, many people who I, I'm engaged with, like they're suddenly excited by being here and by returning, as opposed to, I want to get out of here, yeah, which has been the prevalent kind of feeling among spiritual communities. I want to get out of here. You know, I, this is my last incarnation. I'm off, and that's, you know, I think there's a more compassionate view, and I think a more exciting view that, you know, we can actually bring, you know, and you know, it's like a warriors view as well. Spiritual warrior like this place needs us. It needs us here to do this work. So yeah, I think that's why we're having these conversations. For me,

Chris Bache  53:32  
I don't think the creative genius that gave birth to the galaxies and planets inside the galaxies and solar systems would inculcate and it created reincarnation. We didn't create it. The religions didn't create it. Nature created it. And I don't think it would create reincarnation to grow us to an awareness of our first inkling of our deep, deep spiritual essence, with the purpose being, okay, then you can go, then you can go. I think we missed it. We don't understand that awakening is part of is a process which really is part of the transformation of time and space itself that we are here to change. We are changing the world. It really is heaven on earth. Is what, the process is about, yeah,

Richard Rudd  54:23  
and the prophecy on the prophecy, let's leave that as a seed for next time. And it sounds good. Yeah, wonderful. Thank you, Chris. What a fantastic

Chris Bache  54:32  
and I'll just leave with this thought. I wonder what our personal farmer life history is that we meet in such ease and fruitful dialog you and I, so I honor the history between us, whatever it is

Richard Rudd  54:47  
I will contemplate that. Yeah. Much. Love. Great. Thank you.

Unknown Speaker  54:53  
You.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
