Moderator  0:01  
Chapter Nine, LSD and DMT, entity relation. This talk is presented by Chris M Bache, professor emeritus in Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at Youngstown State University, where he taught for 33 years. He is also a adjunct faculty at the California Institute of integral studies, Emeritus fellows at the Institute of Noetic science and on the Advisory Council of Grof. Legacy training, an award winning teacher and international speaker. Chris' work explores the philosophical implications of non ordinary state of consciousness, especially psychedelic states. He has written four books, translated into eight languages, life cycles, a study of reincarnation in light of contemporary consciousness, research dark night, early dawn, a pioneering work in psychedelic philosophy and collective consciousness, the living classroom, an exploration of teaching and collective fields of consciousness, an LSD and the mind of the universe, the story of his 20 year journey with LSD. Please note that the image discussed in this presentation can be seen in the supplemental PDF. 

Chris Bache  1:12  
Pleasure to be here, to be experience all of your thoughts and energy and to be able to contribute to that pool, it's just wonderful. Anton, thank you for the invitation. Thank you for bringing us all together. David Rory, thank you for making it happen. Do all the legwork that pulls us together. The day I got the invitation to come to this conference, when Christina came home, I said, hey, something interesting came in the mail. Today, I just got a wonderful invitation to participate in a conference on DMT and entity encounters in England. She said, Yeah. I said, yeah, they're only two problems. I haven't done much DMT and I don't have entity encounters.

Chris Bache  1:54  
So This started a long process of first reading everything I could read on DMT, and I have done the DMT Summit. I've done Ayahuasca,

Chris Bache  2:03  
and I have had entity encountered, particularly with Savio divinorum and an Ayahuasca session. So I'm totally confident and comfortable with the idea there being multiple levels of intelligence in the universe and multiple entity forms or encapsulations of that intelligence. I'm real comfortable with that, but in what is my primary work, and the LSD work that I did from 79 to 99 the nature of that work has always been driving towards a fundamental singularity of consciousness. And it's not that this disqualifies or trivializes entities, but it's a different texture. And so it's led me to think about,

Chris Bache  4:27  
All of you know the distinction between Psyche alytic therapy and psychedelic therapy, psychedelic, low dose, psyche lytic psychedelic, high dose. All my work, after three preliminary sessions at 250 micrograms, was all at high dose, 500 to 600 really, about 600 micrograms. And at first I thought I was just doing psychedelic therapy, an extended course of psychedelic therapy. Of course, you know that in the Spring Grove program, they limited those psychedelic sessions to one to three sessions, because the idea was to give you a.

Chris Bache  6:12  
working with doses that high is very demanding. It's very unorthodox, and it may not be even recommended. I mean Ralph in his wonderful book, Ralph Metzner, where's Ralph? There you are. In his book, allies for awakening recommends against taking doses aside. He says it's overwhelming. It tends to produce dissociated states, and it tends to produce dysphoria. You get so overwhelmed by the intensity of the experience, you can't manage it. And I think that's good advice. I think that's wise advice, particularly if you're working at a clinical level and you're working to heal, there's no need to shake up the system that hard and that severely.

Chris Bache  7:00  
I'm not a clinician, and I wasn't really trying to heal. I'm a philosopher. I was trained as a philosopher. I wanted to explore the universe, and so I just adopted, partly, I adopted the high dose method because I was in a dual career marriage, and it was hard to get time to have a session day, and I just wanted to make the most out of every session day that I could do. So I chose working with higher doses, but it brings certain challenges. The challenge of recall is a real challenge, and I developed a craft, or what I call the craft, of remembering. When you go into new territory, you will lose some of those experiences. You won't be able to bring them back in their entirety, there'll be gaps in your notes, but I found when going back to the same territory the next session and the next session, those gaps began to be filled in. I could bring back more of the experiences you have to literally train your mind to be able to stay cognitively coherent in new modalities of experience, new modalities of consciousness. There are two phases of every session. Just simply, there's a cleansing phase and an ecstatic phase. There's the purifying phase, and then there is the teaching of the ecstatic phase. It's just, you're going to see this is going to come up in my discussion, and I want to emphasize that I approached this entire task as a philosopher with the rigor that I had internalized, first as an historian and then later as a philosopher. I mean, all the variables were standardized. The sitter for all of my sessions was the same sitter, with the exception of two sessions, always the conditions are standardized, always starting at the same time of day, always isolated. I have never taken psychedelics and gone to a concert. I've never taken psychedelics and gone for a walk in the woods. My work here has been 73 high dose sessions in a highly standardized environment, and I've kept methodical track of where I went, because even though individual sessions are hard to conceptualize, multiple sessions are even harder to conceptualize, because there is a trajectory of learning that takes place across those sessions. I'm not trying to tell the story of my individual life story. In these sessions, I'm really trying to look at the deeper cosmic, logical or philosophical story. So in high dose sessions, these small circles represent kind of personal life experiences. I found that my the personal experiences started at the beginning and came when I was coming back. But for the most part, after I got started, these experiences at the top of the circles, when the when the psychedelic was at its peak, I was operating far beyond the limits of personal consciousness. It would touch into there were personal healings, and it would touch into personal dimensions. But for the most part, I was operating outside. Personal consciousness. Once we got through some of the first five or 10 sessions or so, I kept rigorous records track of the whole thing, all the dates, circumstances, and I even plotted the astrological variables. Once I began to understand astrology, and it made sense to me, I began to use astrology to choose the dates of my sessions. I was looking for the circumstances that gave me the greatest likelihood to be truly cathartic and also give me breakthrough potential. I also wanted to test Stan Grof and Rick Tarnas hypothesis that Transcendence can be a predictor of the content of psychedelic sessions, and I'll come back to that. One goes through many iterations of death and rebirth, which raises some pretty interesting questions,

Chris Bache  10:52  
multiple levels of death and rebirth in a successfully a successive, increasingly intimate conversation or communion with the universe, the first death and rebirth is, of course, ego death. And I'm particularly fond of this representation of ego death from Alex gray. It kind of jives with my experience. It's a total destruction of your time, space identity, of your physicalist identity. But when one goes into death after that, you are not simply repeating ego death. You're experiencing deeper modalities of death that correspond to the deeper dimensions of reality. And I'm using psychic, subtle and causal here. There are other systems. We could talk about it in other ways, but it's not simply a repetition of ego death. It's a different kind of death. And this becomes such a theoretical issue that I've really spent some time thinking about, what is it that dies, what's dying in those later deaths? And if you're interested in hearing my thoughts on that, or seeing my thoughts, it's a paper published on academia.edu, on life, death and rebirth, and LSD psychotherapy, where one of the questions I'm asking is, what dies in these advanced levels. So what I'd like to do now is just give you the chapter headings and just a few comments on each of these chapters to give you a sense of where it went, beginning with crossing the boundary of birth and death. And if you know Stan grofs work, this is classic perinatal matrix, perinatal experiences. A lot of fetal sensation, a lot of confrontation with the existential limits of life, a lot of intense physical purification, perinatal seizures, convulsions, detoxification of the body, really, really rigorous, a hard physical workout, much more physically violent than I had anticipated, even knowing Stan's work ahead of time, I thought perhaps maybe it was because, maybe It's because I was using such high doses. Maybe not, I'm not sure. And then finally culminating in ego death, having your life just turned inside out and just snapped me like a twin. And it did it for me with exquisite kind of ingenuity. I began the day as a white male, highly educated, obsessed with the meaning of life. Take each one of those and reverse them. I became female. I became people, women of color. I became philosophically it, you know, just philosophically trivial. I just no concern with that whatsoever, totally absorbed with the mundane conditions of life, and I became that, amplified by 100 by 1000 I became hundreds and 1000s of women in all circle circumstances that were not me. And that was the universe's way of just saying, you think you're this. Watch this. I'm going to turn you into the opposite. Now. What are you? Which is nothing wrong with being black, nothing wrong with being woman, nothing wrong with being philosophically uninterested. It's that what was wrong was the constriction that that identification, those set of social and physical roles, placed upon my own consciousness. The message was where you are going. Those things do not apply. Let go and go beyond. So I went through this deep process of two stages, and then after a transitional period, I went into what I call the ocean of suffering, systematically, session by session over two years. That first round lasted about two and a half years. Over two years and 14 sessions, I was taken deeper and deeper and deeper into an ocean of collective pain, rage, unbelievable, rage, suffering. It just overwhelmed me. You have to learn and practice how to experience suffering this magnitude, until taking eventually into the very bowels of hell, worse than any of the literature or descriptions of hell suggest. And this took place in two years. Essentially I stopped my work in the middle for a six year period. So I did one year that took me into the ocean of suffering, stopped my work for six years, started again, and then that session started exactly where the previous session had stopped. Different time of life, different expectations, different astrology, and yet it was an absolute continuity. We just picked up the work and it got worse and it got worse and it got worse. My experience is that you start you you have your intentions, you set your intention. But when it comes to working with high doses of LSD intentions just don't amount to very much. I got to a point where I was just begging for it to stop, to be over. It enough was enough, but it didn't. It just kept getting worse. This led me, it's a major theme behind my second book, Dark naturally Dawn was tried to trying to answer the question, why this collective pain? Why so much suffering? Stan Grof theory is that collective suffering is drawn into a session because it resonates with ego death, and therefore it's kind of drawn in by resonance to ego death. When Ego Death finishes, the collective suffering disappears because it's no death going on to anchor it. My experience was that I had already gone through ego death. This was different. This was a completely different modality of suffering. And what I eventually came to the conclusion of is that it wasn't aimed at my personal liberation at all. It wasn't trying to heal me. It wasn't a detoxification of my past in any way, shape or form. It was aimed at healing nothing less than some dimension of the human collective unconscious. It was like the universe was using my sessions to detoxify the human species of some of the trauma of its history, of its wars, of its murders, of its pain and suffering coming through the sessions. And as I've talked about this over the years, I have found more and more psychedelic explorers saying, yes, that drives with my experience too. We think the universe is interested in our personal transformation, and it is, but the universe is equally interested, if not more interested, in the transformation of our species. And if you will turn your work over, if you will turn your life over to that, the universe will use it to accomplish its end. And right now, at our time in history, I think we are overwhelmed by the forces of historical transformation. They're showing up in our session so so strongly. This is the cleansing phase of this two years work. Now the next two chapters are the ecstatic phase of those same years. So the first year of the ocean of suffering, when I went through that and went into the ecstatic phase, I entered deep time and the soul. I experienced the whole of my life from beginning to end as a simultaneous, completed, finished product, all of it, it was like looking at your life through a paper towel where all the details disappeared and all time has collapsed, and you experienced the whole. I experienced the whole of my life. I didn't experience all the details, though there was a tremendous saturation of detail, but I experienced my life as it had been lived. I didn't experience being old in some fuzzy, amorphous sense, I experienced the distilled essence of all the time moments of my life. It was such a strange state of consciousness. The first time I went into this state of first time I moved outside of into this time modality, and

Chris Bache  19:17  
I came back and I couldn't remember. It just was the most meaningful experience of my life, and it just disappeared. It started coming to me in my dreams. It dropped in when I'd be watching, listening to music, and all of a sudden, my mind would open. I'd catch another piece of it. I'd catch another piece of it. But the next time I went into the state, I remembered more, and the next time I remembered more, and I was eventually over four or five sessions, I learned how to stabilize awareness in deep time. I learned how to stay awake and stay conscious and stay cognitively coherent inside deep time. And this is really important if you're a philosopher or you want to do any critical work with these states, you can train. Train perception. You can train consciousness to operate in these conditions, and I want to mention that context with deep gaso to you, Bill, I think ineffability is overrated as a marker of mystical experience. Now it's true, and we've all had the experience. Our experiences overwhelm our linguistic capacity. But my experience is, if you keep going back and you press the edge multiple times, multiple times, your ability to articulate improves. You get clear understanding of the malaise or the complex weaving of experiences that are there. I had to develop a certain technique how to do that. However, always record the session within 24 hours, and when I'm recording to the session the next morning after the session. You know, after a high dose session the next day, you're kind of porous around the edges, you you're kind of your cognitive capacities, your verbal skills, are back. What I would do is I'd play the music of the session in exactly the order in which it had been played during the session. So I'd be here with my headphones, I'd be playing the music, and I would play the passage of the say, the first hour, over and over again while I was writing, getting back on the edge of the state until I was sure that I had captured all the experiences, and I'd put on the next state, the next piece of music, and I'd do the same thing. So it's really working an edge. I call it standing at the edge of the well, where you're working an edge inside and outside, trying to record. And I, once I have the session recorded, I don't change it. I don't edit it. I've learned that if I try to improve the wording here or there, I actually might end up distorting something that was contained in the crudeness or the structure of the original language. That's why whenever I quote my sessions in any book, they're always italicized, because they are to me, my they're my red book. They are the core communion in this the second year, when, after the sixth year, I hate us, and I came back for the next year, I went through a total, total Jung far beyond personal reality. No explanation given. I just entered a different level of conversation. I was taken on a series of what I would call initiations into the universe. There was, it was a well organized journey. Every session built upon the session I preceded it. I was taken deep into the beginnings of creation. I experienced creation as an act that resulted from the from two divine beings, one divine being that stayed outside of time and space, the other divine being manifested as time and space. And was the divinity that manifested the total totality of Nirvana, Qi, or which we are now. I had never anticipated that love, an extra ordinary Cosmic Love, lay at the font of creation. But in when I went into this experience, I was just overwhelmed with the love. One of the experiences took me on a cosmic tour. There was an intelligence to never, never couldn't see it. There were no images. But I was with this intelligence, and it was showing me the universe. It would take me somewhere and show me something, and I would, I would see it, and I would understand. And then it would take me somewhere else and show me something else. I so often wished that I had a PhD in physics and in astronomy, particularly because if I had those degrees, I it could have shown me so much more. I would have been able to understand more, but it showed me it was the philosopher. Philosopher's dream of a lifetime, to be able to experience the universe in this way. Two sessions later, I was being taken on another tour, same kind of thing, but this time, suddenly I stopped, and I asked, Who am I with? Who are you? And I swooned. I went through a kind of a mini death, and I woke up in a different, deeper level of reality. And there I discovered that I was with myself capital M. And then it process repeated again. I asked, because we were in a dialog, and I asked, Who am I with? And every time I asked that, and this is relevant to entity encounters, every time I asked that, I would die and then come and wake up in a deeper reality and discover that I was with a deeper dimension. I was in a deeper dimension of myself. And this went on for two hours. I kept dying and dying. Dying and dying, until eventually it became clear I was there was no outside to my being. There was no outside. This is non dual causal reality. All of existence takes place within it. All aware, all perceptions of duality, all all subject object, is some permutation taking place within the vast expanse, what I call the great expanse. One of the things that began to happen in this period was that I began to be shown what I came to call the master story. It's going to come up later, but I began to be again in enormous expansions of time, far beyond the 100 years of my own lifetime, or far beyond that, I began to be shown what appeared to be the intention for the human race, the large story of the human race that we were going we were being driven from within to an evolutionary threshold, a threshold of enormous evolutionary significance. That story just continued to be a theme that built over the next five years in my sessions, the initiation the universe lasted about two years, eventually when the ocean of suffering came to a final culmination, just as hard to describe the magnitude of the of the absorption and transmission of collective suffering, it came to a culmination, and It threw me out into what I call the greater real, or into archetypal reality. And for the next year and a half I spent all I spent all my sessions exploring the greater real, the transition that the kind of death, the form that death took to move into this level. And I can't emphasize it enough, the ocean of suffering became the foundation energetically for everything that that happened for years following the death and rebirth involved being immersed in like liquid fire, white hot lava flows being taken into the center of the Sun and just vaporized and just shattered by enormous heat, liquid fire pouring through me, and yet somehow, while being destroyed at One level awareness, continuing at another level, continuity of awareness continuing. I've learned that continuity of awareness does not mean continuity of self or continuity of ego, but continuity of awareness does continue. When I entered the greater real, my humanity began to fall away from me, which I discovered was a deeper form of death than ego. Death as ego death, you lose your individual identity. When your humanity falls away from you, you lose your human identity. It's a deeper level of identity. I began to move into levels of reality that are beyond the collective consciousness. It's kind of like a space station orbiting around Earth, just a completely different dimension of consciousness, hyper clear. And there I encountered what people would call the archetypes, but they weren't the archetypes like Plato described them. They weren't eternal ideas in the eye, in the mind of an unchanging God, because they were living. They were dynamic. They were in movement, and they were vast, and they weren't anything nearly as small as Jung's archetypes. And Jung is one of my heroes, but there was nothing nearly as anthropomorphic as what Jung is describing.

Chris Bache  28:53  
I encountered living beings so huge, so vast, the closest my mind could come to giving them any structure or form is it saw them as galaxies, millions of light years across beings, and these were the beings that were responsible for generating time and space itself and some of the formative conditions within time and space. And then in subsequent sessions, I was brought a little bit lower in what I would call the low subtle level. I think of the least living beings as high subtle level reality. And in the low subtle level, I began to be taught all sorts of things about the collective tissue of humanity, both the collective body and the collective mind of humanity in very precise detail, in different configurations. I began, for example, to have experiences of reincarnation, not as an individual, and not how an individual experiences reincarnation, but an entire species reincarnation. Every 100 years, an entire species molting all the cells of its human beings and then generating a new generation, whole new generation, and the intelligence of the articulateness of our collective incarnational process to experience that I had always thought of reincarnation in individual terms of a lot of individual souls incarnating for their individual spiritual development, but here was the experience of an entire species and the intelligence that had brought This species into being, pulsing and beginning to see that something was happening in history that was an expression of this intelligent collective pulse. There was something happening over the last several 100 years and in the 100 years coming, that was a collective process that all of our individual stories are connected to this collective story, and I began to write about that in dark net, early dawn, when I have a chapter on collective karma, or going beyond the story of the soul, it was out of these kind of experiences. Eventually, I wrote my third book, the living classroom. I never talked to my students about my psychedelic work. Obviously, Provost does not like to hear that their professors of religious studies are doing massive doses of LSD on the weekends. Never talked to my students about it. Had a firewall. Professor shaman, don't talk about those two. But what? Of course, consciousness doesn't respect those boundaries. Consciousness is consciousness. Consciousness is feels. Feels are there. I began to find that my students began to be activated in the classroom by what seemed to be in rhythm or in resonance with my own psychedelic work. I began to find that there was a porosity developing between the mind of my students and my mind. I would reach for some example to illustrate a principle, and I would just create an example. And that example came from somebody students, some life, life experience of my students, and it would touch them in a deep and significant and penetrating way. And this began first time it happened second, third time began to happen regularly. Students began to have unusually deep experiences around some of the concepts that I was presenting in class. So I was presenting world religions, and I'm talking about the perennial philosophy, and we're talking about these kind of old widespread ideas, the divine nature, and my students began to have spontaneous experiences of these realities that seemed to be ignited not not by the words, but by the fact that somehow these experiences were now living inside of me because of my psychedelic work, and there was a contagion taking place. There was a fire lighting fire. I knew I was in trouble when one day I looked up and I saw six students in a room of about 30, and they were all crying, very quietly, just crying. Enormous forces were involved. Eventually, I came to understand it wasn't simply a resonance between their work and my work, but it was actually there was a field in the room, a field that was created by the collective energy, not just of the people who were in the room at the time, but by all the students who had ever taken this course with me at the university, that these fields were getting stronger over time, and they were they were facilitating accelerated and deeper learning in my classes that got stronger year by year, decade by decade. I wrote the living classroom, and I didn't mention psychedelics, because psychedelics were not to the main point. The point the point is the nature of consciousness itself. And anybody who works with any methodology, where they go deep into consciousness in their own consciousness, where they touch the collective psyche, they can expect to trigger these type of resonance experiences in the lives of people around them. The following year was a year that I call the benediction of blessings. It was a year of just extra ordinary blessings. I mean, if the ocean of suffering was really hard to go through, the benediction of blessings was just one phenomenal blessing after another. At this point, I entered what I would call causal reality. And lived in causal reality, many experiences of oneness and permutations of oneness, experiences of the fertile void, entering to experiences where suddenly the entire. Entire physical universe being experienced in a position of oneness suddenly began to be erased and dropping into an absolute, formless void underneath it. At this point, there was a tremendous sense of closure. I just felt completely satisfied. There were extra ordinary experiences of cosmic love. I felt like I had given something that I had been asked to give in the ocean of suffering and the universe had rewarded me more than I could possibly have imagined. I felt complete closure. I had no idea what might happen next, but I wanted to find out, so I kept going. What happened next is actually the diamond Luminosity. But let me back up just a bit. One of the things that was so wonderful for me listening to Berger talk today is his discussion of the hyper dimensionality of time, because the deep time that I went into in the early session that had to do with my life. I stopped going into deeper and deeper modalities of time in which I experienced large swaths of time that pertain to the human species, not timelessness, not going outside of time that happened, but not here, but a period of time of like, 100,000 years later, a million years as a simultaneous present, not a billion, but a million years. And I was being shown things and taught things about what's taking place over this long landscape of time. Eventually, I gathered all of the visions of the master story that I had been being given for all these previous three chapters. I organized them and put them into this story and telling at least what was my visionary experience of what's happening in history, where humanity is going, the crescendo that we're coming through in time. And I was doing this work, this is in 9495 by this time. So it was, it was a good while ago, and in one of these sessions, actually a session that came right in the middle of what I'm going to be going into next. It took me into deep time, and it took me into the future, and it took me into the core of the depth death and rebirth of the human species, which I experienced, not as a human being, but I experienced it as the species. Something about the work I had done allowed me to open up to some vast expanse of

Chris Bache  37:47  
collective, collective psyche, so that when I experienced this death, it was a kind of death that was taking place with millions of people involved, and I experienced a complete collapse down to the base, root of survival. It was like, like a hurricane coming across an island, until everybody was just grabbing the closest thing they could grab on to and hold on to, and it looked like everyone was going to die. And then the storm passed, and there were survivors, and they emerged, and when they emerged, they were completely different. When they began to put their life together, there was a creativity and there was a there were different human beings than the human beings who had gone into the crisis. There was a profound depth of communion with the divine that had not been there before. There was a depth with the soul that had not been there before. And there was an intellectual cross fermentation and creativity that had not been there before. It was like the whole human species was enlivened to a new level. This began to be the context of my entire life, I began to understand that all and I think all of us are here serving some role in this larger historical drama. I think we all knew what we were getting into. We all chose to be here, and we are all active participants in bringing about the birth of the future human. Where I went after the benediction of blessings was in a series of experiences of what I call the diamond Luminosity, the Great Awakening session of the birth of the human future human took place in the middle of that diamond Luminosity work, their light shows up many times at many different levels in the sessions. It's a very common experience to experience light, and I had experienced light many different times, in different places, in everything that had taken place before. When I talk about the diamond Luminosity, I'm not simply using. Metaphor to describe the light. I'm trying to describe a particular quality of light, a hyper, hyper clarity. Imagine a laser beam, hyper dense, hyper concentrated, incredibly pure, so refined, it becomes so clear, so clear, so clear, it becomes invisible. Diamond Luminosity, the closest thing I can find in the spiritual literature is the Buddhist discussion of Dharmakaya, the clear light of absolute reality, the light that opens when we die and when we have an opportunity to transcend all time and space and all the Bardo echoes of time and space. Over the next four years and 25 sessions, I entered this diamond Luminosity four times and only four times. In between those four times about five sessions, it was happening about every fifth or sixth session, tremendous purification, tremendous purgation, tremendous healing, but just tremendous detoxification. When my experience is that every time you move into a deeper level of reality, and you can go level deeper that way, or you can go deeper this way. Both of them are true. But every time you go into a deeper level of reality, it is a more intense level of energy. And if you're going to stabilize your consciousness at that level, you have to acclimate to that energy. If you just have glancing contact with it, if you kind of glance it and touch it. You may not have to, but if you're going to stabilize your awareness and really become a citizen of that level of reality, you have to be able to function with that energy and that just in these deep, deep states that just takes enormous sacrifice and enormous purification processes. The second time I entered the diamond Luminosity, I would this was the deepest I ever went in all of my sessions I was as I was in extra Samsara reality or outside the Bardo. I was in this hyper diamond Luminosity, and just a sheer joy of radical and then late in the session, it did something. It changed my entire philosophy of life. Everything pivoted 90 degrees. And the light I saw something in the far, far distance, a reality. And a light came out of that reality, and it hit me like a like a lightning bolt, and that reality was as far beyond it was light, and I call it the absolute light. It was as far beyond the diamond Luminosity as the diamond Luminosity was from time and space. It hit me and completely shattered me. And that's when I began to realize that it's an infinite progression. I used to think that sooner or later, you'd come to an end, that you do all this work, and there is an end. You know, oneness with God. Stan Grof talked about the fertile void, but I had experienced oneness with God many times I had experienced the fertile void, and I had discovered that there are actually permutations of oneness, that oneness has many permutations within it, and even the fertile void, though it sounds like a contradiction, there are levels within the fertile void. This experience taught me that it is infinite. You stop when you simply can no longer endure the encounter, when you don't have the energy to keep going anymore. What happened after that? Not by my own design, but what happened after that? And instead of going deeper into the light, the light began to come deeper into me. It began to crunch itself deeper and deeper into my body, into my cellular structure, until eventually it changed my eyes. It changed how I perceived the world, physically and in my last session. And then final vision, the 70th vision. The last two visions were kind of like the goodbye visions. They were the goodbye sessions. It was universe saying goodbye. I didn't know we were ending, but it was time to end, and the universe was saying goodbye to me. But before it said goodbye, there was one more serious piece of work to do, and it put me through the worst strip down I had ever been through in all of the previous sessions. The 70th session, just stripped me down and took broke me down and broke me down and it I truly, I mean, I've lost my mind many times in these sessions, and I thought I'm. Coming back from this one. This just really crunched me out. And then when I went through it, I woke, I came to, and I began to have a series of experiences, and basically what to make a long story short, it took me deeper into deep time than it had ever taken me before I was in a radically expanded frame. I don't know how much time, maybe within a frame of reference, I think maybe a million years. But in that context, one of the most important things that happened is that it gave me the experience of the future human, my deepest experience of the future human. I've had the experience several times up to that point, but it gave me the experience of the future human, the and I it is a change in the fundamental collective psyche. It's not a change in the surface of our being. It's a change in the very, very core of our collective psyche. When the collective psyche changes, and all the individual psyches that incarnate and adopt that species form are living a different life, that's the being and the future human, I'll lose it if I try to talk about it. It is so beautiful, so magnificent, so compassionate, so healed, so intelligent. Everything we're doing now, we will see that it was worth it to give birth to this being in history. This is a magnificent being. Human beings are so courageous. We are giving our life and soul and blood in history, and it's going to get bad, and we're doing it to give birth to this future being. And the last chapter, which I am in now, writing now, is coming off the mountain. What happened when I stopped and it came in bumpy and it's hard coming off the mountain was hard, because when you go this deep over this long a period of time, to step away was grueling ordeal. I've never tried to summarize it So briefly, but if I were to try to just kind of bracket the stages of Death-Rebirth, and rebirth. Remember, we had these multiple serious circles of death and rebirth. I'd count fundamentally five, except this doesn't really take into account the time, because there's cycles of death and rebirth that have to do with transcending time. But I think these represent the kind of fundamental major episodes of dying and waking up into a new reality,

Chris Bache  47:45  
which then Now let's bring us some strong conclusions, LSD and DMT. My experience with all of this is, as Louise said, initiation into these realities is by becoming you don't take yourself into that reality and then have a Transpersonal experience. The ego does not have a Transpersonal experience, or something doesn't have an experience you are. You become a citizen of that reality. You must let yourself die as what you are, and you dissolve into the wavelength or the frequency or the modality or the intelligence of that reality, and then after a while, once you've stabilized at that reality, when you die again. You die in, you leave behind what you had died into, and you die into another reality. So my experience in this work was that I was being successively destroyed and therefore being allowed to enter into more intimate experience of communion with the living intelligence of the universe at different levels of reality, beings only exist as discrete beings within certain cosmic context being, the sense of separate being. I think I associate primarily at psychic and low subtle level of reality. When you're going into subtle and high subtle levels of reality, you're dealing with bigger beings that like encompass much larger swaths of being until, until eventually, in causal reality, you're not dealing with beings at all, even archetypal beings. You're dealing with one being, one universe. All differentiation taking place within so how do we describe, or how do we conceptualize this difference between the DMT encounter with so many beings, and my experience is with so few beings, but so much being. And we could talk about levels of reality, which I think is part of the conversation. We can also talk about Morphic fields, because substance. Have Morphic fields associated with them, I think. And LSD is a relatively young psychedelic has a lighter Morphic field, and therefore there is less kind of collective programming associated with it than with Psilocybin or Ayahuasca. But what I'd like to focus on here, which I think is in some ways the most seminal, is what I would call the participant, participatory nature of psychedelic experience. That is, I'd like us to step away from the idea that psychedelics transport you into a reality, and then you experience that reality. I don't think that's what happens. I think there is a much more subtle interplay between the mind which knows and the mind which is being known. And I'd like to particularly focus on the role of death and dying in shaping the LSD interface. And I'd like to point to the significance of the long window of the LSD interface. LSD is a pain in the ass because it keeps on going when you're pretty ready you'd like to come back. You've seen an option today, but it keeps going and going. The short acting psychedelics are very handy in that way. They give you quick access and quick out again. But there is something that there is an advantage to the large window, whether it's from DMT or five Meo DMT and a snuff instead of the smoking, or whether it's Ayahuasca instead of the snuff, but the long window allows a much more extended interplay between the consciousness which You're exploring and the consciousness which is doing the exploring. And here I'd like to draw upon the work of my friend Jorge fair, his wonderful work on revisioning Transpersonal theory, where he's articulating a post perennialist vision cosmology and a participatory cosmology. His basic intention is, we don't simply discover the world that's there. We we there is a participation. We are being kind of elicits sets of experiences out of reality. We crystallize. It's a participatory cosmology. And I think something like that has been true in my experience. My experience is that consciousness, or is an infinite ocean with infinite possibilities, many, many levels, and that when we take a psychedelic or when we meditate, or when we do trance, or when we go into a created state, the mind that we drop into this infinite ocean acts as a seed. It's a seed crystal that catalyzes out of the infinite potential a certain set of experiences. Those experiences change us. We drop our silliness, we drop our pain, we we are purged of the things that keep us small, we become pure, hopefully kinder, cleaner. And when that seed crystal is changed, when it is dropped into that infinite consciousness, again, it catalyzes an even deeper form of communion, an even deeper set of experiences. So we literally kind of evoke the level of reality, and the citizens that live in that level of reality, depending upon the quality of the consciousness that we bring to it. I think it's maybe something like this, the less one is a being at the moment of contact with infinite potential, the fewer beings one will encounter. It's almost like you have to be a being to encounter beings. If you're a big being, you'll encounter maybe big beings. If you're a small being, you may encounter small beings. What if you're not a being at all at some point, or what if you've sort of let go so deeply anyway, the converse is, the more you are being at the moment of contact. That is, the fewer deaths that you've undergone, the more beings you're likely to encounter. And this is, I wonder sometimes whether this might be something about what's going on in the DMT interface, in that because it's so fast, because it drops you out of your time space identity so quickly, and it and it does kind of shatter your egoic reality. And yet, I was very interested to see in one of the earlier presentations the affirmation that your kind of ego comes with you. And according to this hypothesis, if your ego comes with you, then that's going to give a certain information or certain structuring to the kinds of ways you're going to experience reality. At that level you will experience those. The multiplicity of beings may be a fractal echo of the being quality that we bringing to it. See what I mean, which ultimately then brings us back, I think, to the question of levels, and to this earlier schematic. And I again, I don't have any interest in the categories, and I don't have any interested in the number. But the basic idea is that the world we enter when we're working with psychedelics is a multi layered world. Multiple levels of intelligence. Beings exist kind of relative to levels. And when one moves into deeper and deeper states, there is a sense in which, just as your being falls away, beings fall away. When I moved into the diamond Luminosity, there were no beings. There was just light. I was just like. The amazing thing is that somehow conscious my my mind was there, but it was an infinite mind. It was just infinite, pure clarity between that Infinite Light and where you and I are right now. How many layers of beings of reality are there, and how many types of beings populate those levels? I have no idea, but they're vast in number. Thank you very much.

Speaker 1  56:29  
What follows is a discussion of Chris M baches presentation LSD and DMT entity relation

Speaker 2  56:38  
from Darpan. I wonder if you could just speak a little bit about the actual specifics of the protocol that you observed during those 70 immersions, perhaps about strengths, time of day or night,

Chris Bache  56:51  
my rhythm was to get up early morning. Of course, it's fasting, do yoga, meditation. Always I'm in a private, totally private space, either at home or later when we had children at my former wife's office, lying down mattresses, headphones, music, very carefully calibrated music to pace the stages of opening peak and The Long Tail, always totally taken care of. No ego control required. Someone taking care of me when I'm barfing. And I don't know, people say you don't barf on LSD, I barf a lot on LSD. When you're handling enormous accelerations of energy, one of the ways my body handles that acceleration is barfing also coming back down. I'm barf and coming down again, just kind of getting back in sync with space time. So total isolation, total protection, total permission to let go and a willingness to confront whatever comes at you. I mean, it's very nice. If it opens up, you just open up into bliss, and that's great. It's when the darkness comes at you full force. That's when the real work is done. Because if you want to be to want to be a tourist, that's one thing. But if you want to become a resident, you got to take out the garbage. You don't know where the garbage is coming from, so you have to be willing to let it take you. And that's the hardest part in some you don't know why. Why is this happening? No idea why. But yeah, dosage I was working after the first three sessions, I was working at 600 micrograms. And I say five to six because maybe some of it wasn't as strong as I thought it was. But basically, I was aiming for 600 micrograms, which is, again, I want to caution This is an extremely intense modality to work in the intensity of the arousal at working with LSD, that's strong. And by the way, when you put music on top of that, you amplify it by an order of 10. And I was always working individually. I wasn't working in a group, so I had the luxury of having the music contour my experience, or run in sync with my experience. So when I got into a tight spot, crank up the music and get the really intense, the most intense forms of music. I liked, indigenous music. I liked not music you're familiar with, nothing that has had. You have any personal associations to no music with words in English, always foreign, always you know,

Audience  59:26  
from Kripal, I'm trying to articulate a question here that I think is at the root of a lot of our conversations these days. In your presentation, I detected two models of the imagination. One is what I would call the realist model in which you're experiencing a reality as it really is. And if you were an astronomer, you would be able to recognize things that you couldn't recognize as a non astronomer, which implies that you're actually experiencing the physical universe out there somehow.

Audience  59:59  
RAM that we all live in as well. Then there's this participatory model, which is a very different model that suggests that the subject having the experience is constructing the experience, even though the experience itself is also something real, but it's a kind of both, and those are the two models I hear. The question simply is, can the scientists make us better mystics? By that, I mean, can there be a collaboration between the sciences and mystical experiences that they sort of feed off one another? Mystical experiences give the scientists insights and the sciences give the mystics better models, and they kind of go back and forth and hone in on reality, or this is the tougher question, are the sciences just another set of metaphors that we experience today, just as an ancient mystic would experience, say, a geocentric model of the universe. In other words, when the ancients had mystical experiences, they didn't see galaxies. Or did they the way they framed it was these spheres that they were moving up and down, because that was their cosmology. Do you get the question? Is there an objective cosmology here, or is it just our projections. Again, 

Chris Bache  1:01:21  
my experience is that it is an objective cosmology. I call it the universe, but I technically should be calling it the cosmos. If by Cosmos we mean not just the physical universe, but everything which lies outside and makes possible the physical universe, if that includes so the cosmos is spiritual reality. And as well as physical reality, I would say, I mean, there is an objective cosmos. Now, what we experience of that objective Cosmos, what comes into focus, what, what, what we can understand and engage. I think that is where the participatory quality comes in, the enactment quality. But I don't think it's a construct. I don't think it's like something we're bringing imagining, in that negative sense, into existence. And so I very much think that absolutely bring the scientist into the condition, bring them in contact with these states of consciousness, and there would be a mutual refinement. As I told Bernard, I have often wished that I had a PhD in physics and astronomy, specifically physics and astronomy, because the universe could have shown me so much more. There's much that I haven't even talked about yet. It showed me lots of things and as a philosopher, it taught me. It taught me what happens when reincarnation goes forward in 100,000 years. It taught me where reincarnation is taking us. It taught me how. It taught me things about how humanity is going to change as fast as it needs to change in order to deal with the historical crisis we're coming into. It taught me lots of things that I could understand, giving my background, and then more than I could understand. But if I had a PE if I had Bernard's mind, it could have taught me so much more.

Chris Bache  1:03:14  
It is feeling like, often, like it's pouring knowledge into you, like in your cup, and you hold as much as you can, and the rest of it's just overflowing. You know, it's real from Kripal. So do you think that the mystics and visionaries pre Darwin were experiencing something like the evolutionary impulse, but simply didn't have a language to express that? Or did it take Darwin to give us that imagination that we could then go out into the cosmos and experience the evolutionary impulse. Well, remember the Hindu the ancient Hindus were working in a different cosmology. They were seeing the universe in time, huge like so times. And they had cycles and cycles of kalpas, right? So I think that we get pieces, and then you always have John of the Cross. He says, I saw many more things that I'm not going to talk about. And his rule of thumb was, if the church doesn't affirm it, I won't talk about it. So we don't know what he saw and what he experienced that was unorthodox, and he just refused to talk about and of course, the church had a nasty tendency to execute its mystics. So there's a natural kind of conservatism in much in the Catholic tradition, particularly around its mystics. So I think they were seeing more than they told us, and they were probably seeing more than they could understand, just like I have seen more than I could understand. Now I'd like you to imagine, take yourself forward 500,000 years. We're so proud of our mind, but let's you know we're like chimpanzees to 500,000 years from now, when those beings are going into these states, they're going to be able to see and understand so much more than even the best of us can see and understand now.

Chris Bache  1:05:02  
We're so glad that we're explained. We're beginning to experience the universe and beginning to have, perhaps the beginnings of a more adequate understanding of the magnitude of the size and intentionality and the intelligence of it. But we're just babies on the evolutionary ladder. We're just children. Imagine what we'll be able to understand when we are true adults, or when we are elders. In the evolutionary story 

Moderator  1:05:28  
from Metzner, did you have a sense that you were being guided by a specific, recurring being that you had a relationship with, like a guru, 

Chris Bache  1:05:35  
not a being, not a being, whoever showed him or herself,

Chris Bache  1:05:40  
but a relationship. I call it the creative intelligence, a relationship with the the intelligence of the universe, a relationship with consciousness.

Chris Bache  1:05:53  
I everybody has to have a word for describing this reality that and they some call it the absolute. Some call it God. Some call it the divine. I call it Beloved. It's my beloved.

Moderator  1:06:07  
For Metzner, a personal thing. 

Chris Bache  1:06:09  
Well, not

Chris Bache  1:06:12  
I think the person comes from me, because there is such there is such heartfelt emotion when you're drawn deeply, deeply into the being of existence, and then you're you fall out of it, you come back into a smaller state. There is such a longing.

Chris Bache  1:06:32  
And so I call it my beloved, because my entire life serves that. And I don't think it's an accurate description of that to say it's, it's Beloved.

Chris Bache  1:06:44  
It is loving of extra ordinary proportions and intelligent of extra ordinary proportions. But it never, it never dawned a form. Never took a form. I've had encountered what I would call the council of elders. I was given teachings from different beings at different levels, but in general, and there have been very active dialogs, you know, where I would ask a question, it would give me answers. I would ask a question, it would give me answers, but it never came out from behind the curtain.

Chris Bache  1:07:14  
And when I asked it, who are you, I ended up dying in a deeper into a deeper level, into a deeper level, until I learned that there was, there wasn't another being in that level, from Meister, yeah, but you did ask you said, Who are you? Jeffrey Christ, or was it you? It was an iPhone, yeah, because it was, it was an i thou, because it was taking me somewhere. It was showing me things. It was taking me and then I and here's an interesting thing, when I asked it, who are you? What are you? At the end of that session, what I learned was actually the thing that moved me the deepest wasn't even what it showed me. It was what showing me meant to it.

Chris Bache  1:07:56  
It was so pleased to finally have not just me, but humanity is beginning to get conscious enough that it's beginning to come back to the creative intelligence, to and and recognize what the creative intelligence has been doing for 14 billion years, and it's so pleased to show its work to somebody that touched me, that just wiped me out. I mean, I wept and wept on that

Audience  1:08:24  
from Spowers. Thank you very much. It's really fascinating. I'm really intrigued by your notion of the future human. And I think, like everyone in this room, I've spent much of my life wanting this consciousness shift, shift that is necessary for us to move out of the crisis of separation that's, in a way, been going on ever since the so called great transformation at the beginning of the self reflective consciousness, the absolute apotheosis of this atomized, individualistic thing, and in a way, the big cultural event of our age is going to be the consensus reality, shifting from this notion of consciousness being some epiphenomenon of the brain going on inside our skulls to actually recognizing it and experiencing it as the ground of all being made manifest through this us all. So what I was really asking is, within your visions of the birth of the future human, how congruent is that with your notion of the future human, and how do you see that manifesting? Could you comment on that in any way, in terms of your experience?

Chris Bache  1:09:37  
I think your description is good. It's right. I think what's being shattered is this right on the very center, so I can hurt you, and I'm okay, I can cause hunger in the world, and I'm okay, and because we have a sense of privacy, you know that I am me, and you are you. And I think that's being being. Process of being shattered so that we'll have a you might think of it as a radical expansion of our heart. When our heart holds whole world, then the world will be safe from our mind. We will not hurt with our mind. So I think of it as what's happening, in some ways, could be seen as a vast expansion of heart. Now here's another part. In the 38th session in this during the benediction of blessings, I had an experience that just as earlier I had experienced the whole of my life as a completed whole. In this session, I experienced all of my incarnational lives come into a fruition. And it was like, I think human experience is an incredibly precious phenomenon, lifetime by lifetime. It's like a thread of light living experience. We're wrapping our lives around a core, and we keep on coming back and coming back, sooner or later, it comes a point where all of the lives of the soul Ignite, infuse, and I experience it as an explosion of light when I when this happened, this diamond light just exploded out of my chest. It was the first time I really understood why it's called the diamond light. It's a totally different order of consciousness. It's not like Chris Bache plus one. It's a different order of being. Now I think history is giving birth to the soul on earth, which I'm calling the diamond soul. And I think there is a relationship between the geopolitical and ecological crisis that we're coming into and this inner birth that has been and it's been gestating within us since the beginning of the species. I mean, here's the wonderful thing, when we actually come down to the birth of the future human, we're going to discover that 99% of the work has already been done. Labor follows gestation. We have been gestating for 1000s and 1000s of years. We're about to go into labor. But all the ground, all the foundation, has been laid

Speaker 2  1:12:15  
from spars. We are remembering what we actually are.

Chris Bache  1:12:20  
We are remembering and actualizing, we actualize into a new level, so that when when the soul is born fully conscious on Earth, it's not only conscious to its core, but it's in more intimate rapport with the intelligence of the totality and with each other. And I actually think we get smarter as a species, we'll be able to solve all the technical problems that we are now that are holding us back. And that's the curious thing. As long as we stay fragmented, and the collective psyche is fragmented, we stay to a certain extent, stupid, but when we become whole, when we become integrated, then we literally become more intelligent, the brain kind of enhances and we can do things that we couldn't do before that solves everything we needed solve that, I think, is where we're

Speaker 2  1:13:09  
going from. Way would you relate that to generating bodhicitta for the necessity of the journey that was then unfolding for you?

Chris Bache  1:13:19  
Yes, I would before I entered the ocean of suffering, a session gave me a particular very, very painful experience that did what the Buddhists would call the awakening of bodhicitta. It awakened the will to save all sentient beings. And my understanding, I didn't know what at the time, it took me years. Was years until I put all the pieces together. But the ocean of suffering was a commitment that I personally took on before I was born. My life was incarnated to do this work. And I think just as all of us are incarnated to do the work which comes which we know it when we find it and it is. It's just the natural expression of bodhicitta

Speaker 2  1:14:09  
from Wei. How important do you think it is to have the spiritual practice accompanying journeys, using psychedelics and voyaging into truth?

Chris Bache  1:14:20  
Absolutely, to me, it's vital. It's critical, because we're finding it's pretty easy to crack the shell and go out, but to extract maximum value requires creating a container to holding your sessions in a particular way, first remembering them, holding them and enacting them. And to me, daily practice is absolutely critical if you're going to enter into temporary, short term, intense states of consciousness. In fact, I would suggest that the deeper into temporary states you want to go, the stronger must be your daily practice. There's a discussion in the diamond Luminosity. Chapter where I described the last five years of my work, when I was getting into the diamond Luminosity, I began to incorporate vara Ian Buddha's practice into my daily life, and it was a way of managing. I mean, these states of consciousness sweep through us, and they bring huge tidal waves of energy and tidal waves of knowledge, and it's just like washes through you, and then at the end of the day, you know, you kind of shrink down again, but you're always connected to once you open to certain levels of reality, there's like, there's a filament that always connects to your being, and there's a form of energy that comes to you from that level of reality. And I the more levels of reality that you have permanent connection to, the more your body is having to deal with levels of energy. And I found that excess energy was really problematic. The subtle energy, my subtle energy system was overheating. And I found that doing Vadnais practices, doing various deity practices, gave that energy a place to run. It helped it run, plus some of the great you know, for me, I know Buddhism better than any other. It's, it's kind of user friendly, and it's agnosticism and and it has been a very helpful system to help understand and frame some of my experiences. But that's just me. Other religious systems, the deep spiritual masters, have great capacity to understand, to eliminate my experiences, too,

Audience  1:16:29  
from way, from the perspective of where you stand now. Do you see birth and death as it's manifested in this realm here, as a fiction? Do we have a fictitious narrative about birth and death?

Chris Bache  1:16:44  
We certainly have a fictitious narrative about birth and death. We think our life begins at birth. Our life didn't begin at birth. I just, you know, look into your consciousness, you'll find capacities that are older than your physical body. You know, do hypnotic regression. You have consciousness capacities it's older than your body. We think we're going to die when our body dies. That's a fiction. That's not true. I can put it to you simply, the simplest way, this way, I am so looking forward to the end of my life. I just, not only am not afraid of dying, I'm looking forward to it. I won't push it as long as I'm needed. My commitment is here, but the minute I'm gone, I'm gone, and I'm so looking forward to it, because I've died so many times.

Chris Bache  1:17:37  
If I can get back to where I was in my deepest sessions, and I think I will, because, as Robert Monroe says, when you if you know the address, you can go anywhere. I know the address, it's in my being. And I, if I can get back to there, I consider it a fair trade done deal 

Audience  1:17:56  
from vos. Thank you so much, Chris. Very, very inspirational. I immediately thought, well, this is exactly what the Theosophists were about when they talk about assimilating their consciousness to God. This is the process that they're trying to relate. So you really brought it alive. So I'm so grateful to you for that. It also reminded me of the alchemical process, what the alchemists were doing with the solution and the negreo, everything we study conceptually, you really showed how it's a deep, painful, transformatory process that these adepts have always gone through. 

Chris Bache  1:18:35  
In that context, integration is as demanding as going out, coming back in, surviving it, holding it, integrating it, learning to live and breathe it.

Chris Bache  1:18:48  
That's really, really hard work. And in that respect, the alchemical tradition really speaks to that process. From vos, when you were talking about beloved, he reminded me of Dante as well, who was inspired by the beloved. I suppose my question is about the language, about the fact that the way you speak of it reminds me of the great mystics of the past. Reminds me of that ability to capture experience and concept and deep intellectual understanding in one language, and it seems to me that's what we need for this new human being to emerge, is to enable the world to speak in this language. I think as as our experience deepens, we'll find new ways to say things that we to reflect that deeper experience. So as we become as new skills come online, we'll find new line, new ways to language those skills. There's new relationships. We'll find new ways to language that so I think, yeah, language is growing. Language is becoming more rich. You know, when I said what I said about ineffability,

Chris Bache  1:20:00  
Theory of mystical experience. It is almost as if we're saying God doesn't want to be known, as you talked about, alpha power, my experience is God wants to be known, and we work very hard to help us know creative preponderance of different results, the first resistance, alpha and beta. We hit the limits of our experience. Language fail, the occipital lobe, it does so was it just the press? We keep pressing. If it's not too much during the language productions,

Chris Bache  1:20:29  
theta or gamma increase way, and when you were describing the people you were describing in your talk today, the way they're bending language and the way the great seers are bending language and the great poets, and that speaks to me.

Chris Bache  1:20:45  
I wish I were a painter. I wish I had Alex Gray's the ability to paint my visions, but I'm a writer, and I work very hard to try to boil them down to forms that people can share the way we share Alex Gray's paintings from Cooper, when you were talking about your experience and God being there to celebrate what you did, it really reminds me of a quote that I love, that goes were all aspects of existence or of God experiencing itself. And I love that. And your talk very much reflected that to me, we're all we come from the Divine. We are within the divine. Right this moment, we return to the divine. And I think we we return. I don't. I'm not a Vedanta I don't hold the world view of the Vedanta worldview that we are a drop, returning to the ocean, and we lose ourselves, our identity as a drop. I don't that's not the way I think. I think once we go through this gestational process, that time space puts us through with all this development, I think it's leading to the formation of a being that is able to maintain individual awareness, even under the intensity of returning to the divine. If we come back into the divine expanse, or the great expanse, or however you want to describe too soon we simply are shattered. We can't maintain coherence. But if we do the work, there's something that that diamond is a beautiful image, because a diamond can withstand enormous pressures and yet maintain its integrity. I think that's what we're doing. From Cooper, thank you. And one last thing, when you were talking about humanity shifting, is that what I hear about a lot or read about a lot, called ascension, that we are here for this moment, another way of languaging it. I think we've we feel it, don't we don't we feel that, you know, we're coming to a dead end. We feel that there's this rising coming up underneath us. We feel that there is no other option except to to make this step, and people language it in different ways. But what's common is that we we feel it, and it feels like an irresistible impulse and a life calling we cannot resist. It's just part of it.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
