James Jesso  0:00  
You foreign. Hello everyone. Welcome to Adventures through the mind. I'm your host, as always, James W Jesso, this podcast explores topics relevant and related to psychedelic culture, medicine and research. And I'm going to start this one off with a question. Have you ever wondered what 76 high dose LSD sessions over the course of 20 years might teach a person about how to make sense spiritually of a global crisis and perhaps the collapse of civilization as we know it. Well, if you wondered about that, you're in luck for this episode, because that's exactly what we're going to talk about. We're talking with Christopher Bache, the author of this book, LSD and the mind of the universe. Christopher M Bache is a professor emeritus in the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at Youngstown State University, where he has taught for 33 years, a fellow at the Institute of Noetic Sciences. He is also adjunct faculty at the California Institute of integral studies and on the advisory board for Grof Transpersonal training and the Grof Foundation, an award winning teacher and international speaker. He is the author of three books, and he's been on the show previously, oh, I forgot to get the number of that episode one second, Episode 89 mapping consciousness with high dose LSD, where we talked about, essentially what this was all about. His, his 70, excuse me, 73 high dose LSD journeys over 20 years, and what he experienced and what he learned about the nature of reality and the nature of the universe throughout the course of it. Now this is sort of a follow up from that, from that interview, and it was intended to be, as you'll hear in the beginning, a discussion of various different themes of the book, but pretty quickly, it focused on a particular aspect of the book, which is that while Chris was having experiences of deep time, which is sort of like you can imagine experiencing the entire course of The human existence as a singular moment, or the entire entirety of time and space as a singular thing, for example, although he does a better job explaining it, he had a vision at one point of what he called the birth of the future human, and it coming out of basically extreme cataclysm, in some sense or another, a long phase of extreme strife and grief and suffering and challenges that pushes humanity into its next phase of evolution. And Chris considers where we're at now to sort of be the start of that. So what initially was going to be me just taking quotes out of this incredible book, turned out to be a discussion with with Chris about the crazy situation we seem to be in as a planet right now, and what, from his perspective, is a is the sort of spiritual meaning of it, or how we might approach it spiritually. And yeah, so that's what we talk about now. This interview was actually recorded in September of 2020, I'm not entirely sure why it took me so long. You know what? I'll tell you why it took me so long to get it out is because I was in the interview. I actually was going through a difficult time, and at some point it became less of an interview and more of a young man pleading to an older man for some sort of wisdom to make sense of crisis, make sense of the challenges personally and existentially, that I felt like I was facing in the moment and still kind of feel like I'm facing, and maybe I was a little embarrassed about that. I don't know. But either way, now is the time that it's coming out, and some of you might seem to see some similarities in some of the topics to some recent controversies in the five Meo DMT world. But none of this is a response to that. This is was actually recorded. What is it now? April, so like more than six, more than six months ago. So yeah, that's for context. It's happening. This was recorded September 2020, another point of process about it is that Chris's sound is not always super great. There's some banging, some knocking in the background. Did my best to clean it up, removed a lot of stuff that you won't hear, but bear with it a little bit. In fact, there's one point where he's saying something super meaningful, and it is like some loud thing comes in the background that's so distracting at this moment. That feels like just such a like a pinnacle of, like the value of what he's offering. It just like, it's just an interesting sort of, like reality dance moment. But anyway, so that's those. Those are the caveats, and that's, that's the interview we got today with Christopher Bache before we get into it. I want to give a big thanks to my Patrons on Patreon, without whom this podcast would not exist. So thank you. The people whose names are listed on the screen here on YouTube have been giving significantly some of which for a long time, their names are also in the show notes to this episode, wherever you're catching it. So thank you so much, patrons. And if you're not yet a patron, please become one by heading to patreon.com forward slash James every Jesso, James W gesso, or you can give a one time donation through Paypal or cryptocurrency. Listed links that are listed in the description to this episode. So thanks so much for helping support the show financially, and not not only just for me and for you, but also when people donate, it allows other people who are enjoying the show, who don't donate in order to enjoy the show for free. Because it's free no matter what this is, sort of like, on good faith, I'm producing it for free, and if you like it, toss me some money, and I'll keep making it regardless, you know or well, as best I can. Okay, so that's all. That's all for this intro. Stay tuned to the end. I got a special announcement, but here we go. But here we go. This is my interview, my second interview with Christopher Bache here on adventures through the mind. Enjoy. So Chris, I had been, I had been going through. I had been going through, like, the extensive amount of notes I have, like, I'd listen to our first podcast again, and I went back through the notes I took when I was in your workshop in Vancouver, and also was going through the book. And I just, I kept wondering to myself, like, what, what's the course here, I felt like, in our first in our first interview, I had the ability to to have listened to your talks and had paid attention to the way that you structure your lectures, and then sort of utilize that as the LE, as the, as the, sort of like as the path to walk, having a sense of how you start, what you talk about, and where you go, and then sort of use that as the way. And I didn't have that this time, and so, and if you're okay with it, I thought we might be interesting, because I have your book here, and as you can see, I've had, I've had quite a

Speaker 1  7:39  
time book, yeah. Author loves to see it, yeah? Very Yeah. I moved, I moved

James Jesso  7:45  
on to little tabs, because I was like, Well, you know what? As much as, as much as most like authors like, oh yeah, write in it, fold up the pages, whatever works. I just kind of grew out of wanting to destroy the paper that holds the book. Yeah? So I thought maybe it would be fun, if you're open to it, that I would just go into some of the things that I've felt really moved by or relevant in your book, read the piece, and then be like, What is this? And have you sort of like, speak to that. Would that feel cool for you?

Chris Bache  8:14  
Sure that's fine, great. And I'll tell you too that now that came out, books out, first round of interviews and all that stuff covid hit, stepping back digesting people's first reactions, I don't think I sent you a copy of an article that I just sent to Cy MedNet In unit in England, basically, I'm calling it a post script to LSD. In the mind of the universe, it's responding to people's first takes on the book, first round of experiences. But in that process, I'm finding that there is a whole nother tier of the implications of these potentials, which I just feel like I'm beginning to want to get into. It's like nothing new. And at the same time, the sheer the sheer audacity of the claims concerning the limits and the revised limits of human experience, what we're capable of, and the import of entering such deep intimacy with the consciousness of the universe. It's all just sinking into me at a new level. So that's a constant conversation. I'm really glad to be doing this second bite at the apple, something different, and there's been a whole lot of first interviews. And I'm glad to see I'm glad to spend this time with you, and happy to see where we

James Jesso  9:59  
go. I. Cool is that, is that something that you feel because I'm I'm ready and willing to adapt? Is that something that you feel like you'd like to get into? Or is it something where, if I pick a section of the book, it can work as a reference point, even for your sort of like the second tier of your considerations on the impact of the book?

Chris Bache  10:17  
Yeah, let's do I trust it'll it'll come up where it's relevant in our discussion. Yeah, because it floats in the back and it's not like a specific set of themes, it's, it's

Chris Bache  10:40  
portly, partly, it's the enormity of the vision of history that's involved, and it seems like we're getting into that episode, a period of history faster than I thought we were going to be getting into it. And partly, it's simply the sheer scale of the of the undertaking, but it'll come up when, as it comes up, it'll flow as it comes up in our discussion. I trust our discussion.

James Jesso  11:13  
Well, I mean, I think it's right here, right now, because this is something that definitely came up for me as I was reading near the end of the book. Because I read it, I read it this year. I read it during the 2020, pandemic lockdown. You know, it was one of the things I was I was immersing myself in while I was locked away from the world. Really no different than I would have been otherwise, except I didn't have social events to unfurl into, you know, at the end of the day and on the weekends. Oh, not to mention all the existential, you know, like gravity of it all. But one of the things is, you get to a point where you, you, you're talking about this, sort of, like, this, I'm not using your terminology here, or maybe I accidentally am, because I forget what it was. But something about, like, basically being this rock tumbler, and that this, this future human, is going to emerge out of, like deep strife and struggle and pain and yeah, these sort of like this, look at what will become history as being an event, Not too similar, something analogous, analogous to the cleansing process of your psychedelic explorations, and strictly So, yeah, and so, as I was reading it, I was like, Man, I kind of feel like, I kind of feel like, on one level, I'd be, I might be foolish to think we're already there despite how bad this is. This is nothing, you know. This is ultimately just a virus, right? And just, yeah, yeah, but, but how do you feel about it?

Chris Bache  12:46  
I think of it as an overture. It contains some of the key elements of the symphony that's coming, but only in short, abbreviated forms. It's mobilizing us. I think what's coming is going to be much, much worse, but if we learn this is sort of disoriented us a lot, and it's given us a lot of lessons, and hopefully it's giving us learnings, teachings that will help us in what comes next. But you're right, this is just this is just act one, just an overture.

James Jesso  13:20  
Yeah, stress test is how I heard it described early on, like this. This is a stress of course, it's it has evolved well and beyond just the pandemic, we have sort of the total dissolution of what was once thought of as of objective reality due to the impact of multiple what I have heard described as multi level narrative warfare and the destruction of deep, considerate or coherent thinking and dialog because of social media and how the news and then the, you know, all the populism and nationalism, and also the big push back against these types of things as Well, especially black lives matter and stuff like that, yeah. But, and at the same time, it's like, this really is not nearly as bad as it could get, or maybe will get, yeah,

Chris Bache  14:11  
yeah, I think so. I think you're right. In fact, let me grab a book to bring it up here to bill, because I'm probably going to want to mention it somewhere in this process. And I'd like to have the cover to show you Sure. This is a book I went to get Dwayne Elgin's last book, choosing Earth. It's lifetime, literally a lifetime, of research going into it. And he gives he has a he's a social activist, and a very detailed decade by decade, what he thinks is coming. And he really marshals. He's been tracking the large scientific data global health of the planet people for a long time in. And he has a he really lays out a time of increasingly tight collapse over the next several decades. He really thinks by 2050 we're going to be more than halfway into the great collapse. So I just want to bring it in to mention it when it comes up.

James Jesso  15:23  
Yeah, that's, um, so then what's coming up for me right now is it, is this question of, of and I for listeners, you know, if yes, if they're hearing and getting your work for the first is this the first encounter with you? This might be all of a sudden, like, whoa. How are we already on the deep end here, but this is very much a continuing conversation between you and I, and then also with your work. Yeah, I noticed what comes up for me is this, this, this, you know, the immediate like, what do we do? What do I do? Kind of like that, sort of quick to problem solve, fix, action now forward, rather than how did we get here? What does this mean? How did we how do we come to understand what's happening prior to even coming to understand what an action based solution is? And I'm curious for you where, where you see that process of coming to understand where we are is, yeah, something akin to, you know, you're mentioning about, you know, something about a lot of lessons here. What do you think these lessons are? What are we learning? And, in fact, perhaps, what does it appear from where you're sitting that we're not learning out of all of this?

Chris Bache  16:41  
Yeah? Well, I don't I have to be careful. I'm not on the front line. I have only second hand information from the news accounts. As I watched people react and respond, we're learning a number of things. One of them is we're learning the fragility of our of our system. We're learning our interconnectedness, how systems that have functioned quietly, side by side, seemingly independently, they're not independent at all. They're quite interdependent. We're learning a lot about supply chains and how our where our resources come from, and we're learning that that people who have very modest jobs, from some socio economic viewpoint, to have very important jobs when it comes to maintaining the health and well being of our of our collective so I think we're learning interdependence. We're learning our entire life can be turned upside down much faster than we thought it could. We don't have as nearly as much stability as we think we do. I think we're learning something about the limits of patriarchal ego, and I think Trump is the embodiment, I hope, of the last gasp of the patriarchal monarchy. We're learning how ugly ego is, just how really, really ugly it is, and we're learning a lot about where to go and where not to go when we come into crisis. This polarization is taking place, the resort to violence, how quickly we move to violence? And it's like we take almost any issue, no matter how trivial, like mass, and turn it into an issue which leads to people killing each other. I mean, it's just the mirror. What we're seeing in the mirror is not very complementary. It's pretty ugly. The way I sort of see the larger landscape, of course, is that,

Chris Bache  18:56  
in so many ways, it's ego that built our culture. And by that, I mean simply, it's a human being at a level of spiritual development which identifies with their body, has a certain level of self awareness, but that self awareness stops pretty close to the edge of their fingers and toes, and they still are looking out rationally, looking out for their well being and the well being of a small number of people near them and around them who basically look like them or related to them in some fundamental way. Ego is a magnificent thing, a beautiful thing, an important thing, but a world built by a species that's operating out of egoic awareness is a divided world. It's a world of haves and have nots, and we can't get more extreme in the presentation to ourselves, and then the haves and have nots in Dwayne's book, I came across the statistic that five people own as much of the world's resources as. Half of the world, five people have half of the world's resources. You just can't have that big a disparity of haves and have nots. And it's just being this illness is just blasting this into our faces. Who's suffering the most and who's suffering the most are the poor in persons of color. So a lot going on, but this is just warm up. This is just the first wave. I think, I think maybe the first wave might have been actually the credit crisis of 2008 because that taught us some things, and it also sucked a lot of liquidity out of the system. We have much less, much fewer financial resources to fight with than we did before. And now this is getting deeper. You know, national debt increases, but certainly we are, if not in the first round, we certainly are in a significant second round.

James Jesso  21:02  
I mean, for for listeners again, who don't know like it wouldn't appear as though this conversation is couched in your 20 year journey, your 40 year journey as a philosophy professor, and a 20 year journey with high dose LSD sessions, and the book that were we were referring to earlier is your book on those journeys, as well as a number of other books. And I'm just curious, because what I'm seeing in the world, which is mostly the world that is mediated by a screen at this point is not the kind of place I really want to be both in. I don't both in the sense of, I don't want to be where it appears we're going. I don't want to be a part of a system that does the things that it does, you know, like the I don't I don't like the fact that I'm a part of this disgusting, distorted thing, and also what I see from the behavior of the people around me. And there's a lot to be said about how social media algorithms and and isolation and mental health crises, acknowledged or not, are contributing to this, but I see a lot of toxic behavior, a lot of toxic people, a lot of toxic discussion, sort of, like, draped in this sort of, like, this sort of self confidence, self righteous, almost Machiavellian style, like moralism, of like, the good versus the evil, and the good is me, And anyone that disagrees is like the violent devil I must cast out and and whatever else. And I don't feel good about what I'm seeing about the world, and it makes me want to just like, hide away inside now, yeah, that said couching this in psychedelics and looking at it as as a large psychedelic I'm using air quotes for listeners process that's happening collectively on a global scale, not just with humanity, but we're although we don't know what the feelings and the thoughts or perspectives are the birds and the salamanders and the and the whales and whatever. You know they're going through that with us. So it's like a planet. It's like a planetary experience, right? Yeah, that when I see these parts of myself in a psychedelic session, it's no more comfortable by any means. It's equally as ugly, yeah, you know? And I want to hide away from that too. And yet, yeah, one of the things you talk about in your book is that you we need to learn as a part of the psychedelic journey. We need to learn how to not turn away from our pain, or from that pain, I mean, like the pain of touching a hot fire we turn away from, but this kind of pain that we learn to turn towards it. And I'm wondering if you could just that's not a clear question, but can you just comment on Yeah, yeah.

Chris Bache  24:09  
You know, the starting point of serious psychedelic work is taking complete responsibility for one's own shadow and and you just go into a room, close the door, lock the door. You're inside by yourself, nothing there but you and your mind. And you go into the parts of your being which are at least initially, the most daunting, the most intimidating, the most frightening, the ugliest ones we like to acknowledge, the least you know, and but the commitment is there to take that on, to enter into it, when we see that ugliness being manifested in the world around us by people who are not have not yet taken responsibility for themselves, and they are still. In this exterior mode, where the shadow was really outside of them, the evil and the darkness and the really ugly things were outside of them. That's a very different world, isn't it? And I think this whole process of breaking down, this breaking down process that we're going into is basically going to be breaking down that defense that we have to thinking that, you know, we're the good guys or and the other people are the bad guys. And eventually we're going to have to come to terms with the fact that weird. We did this. We created this imbalance. We have benefited from it. We are continuing to generate it in the cars we drive, in the lives we live and the lifestyles we aspire to. We have done this. We will we have done it. There's going to come a time eventually where there's no place else to look but we have to take individual and collective responsibility for the pain that is that is alive within us and lives of everyone around us. That really is a pivot point, I think, when we just stop blaming the other, stop blaming previous generations. Stop blaming so on so forth. We really settle in. We're not there yet. Some of us are there yet. I mean, I think the psychedelic community understands these things, because that's how you make progress in psychedelic work, is you confront the shadow. Now, when you go into the work, you know that the more you purify, the more you cleanse, the deeper the reward, the deeper the ecstasy, the deeper the teaching. So the more you purify, the deeper the communion. Once you learn that not only do you become more comfortable facing the shadow, but you actually actively embrace the shadow. You active, actively embrace pain and suffering, not because you like pain and suffering, but for two reasons. One is because you learned that the deeper the purification, the deeper the ecstasy. And you don't like to suffer, but you like what's on the other side of the suffering. But the second thing is, you embrace the pain and suffering, even knowing that a lot of it is not yours, because out of the same compassion that every father has for His children, every mother has for her children, and every teacher has for all of their children eventually that everybody has for other people. And you embrace the pain, not counting whether it's yours or somebody else's, but because by doing so, you are helping somebody. You are helping other beings that you may never meet. And my experiences has been that if you do that, if you are willing to take on more than your fair share of suffering, you reap more than your share of benefit. You the universe responds. It can't help but respond. And I think that's going to be happening with us, generationally, this generation, the next generation, the generation after that, is going to go through suffering, more than their share of suffering compared to previous generations. And after they stop kicking and screaming and begin to get down to taking it on and just doing it, I think they will experience the blessings that come from that deep generosity, that that profound existential choice to work with the given, even when the given is terrible, even when it kind of crushes your personal life, but you Still dedicate yourself to the good of the whole. And in that process, something begins to change. Something shifts inside your person, and the more complete the surrender to the process, the more complete the commitment to that process, I think the deeper and the faster the transformation is in our individual lives and our collective lives, so that as we move deeper into this and come through it, I think generationally, we will learn what every psychedelic journeyer learns, that we confront the shadow there is Riches on the other side of this ordeal, and there's no other way to get to it. And in the end, you the irony is, you kind of end up where you were in the beginning, except you're all cleaned out. You're just all sorts of this gunk is out of your system. So you are you, and you are where you were before. Or but you literally are living a different life because stuff that you hadn't realized was compromising you and burdening you is no longer there, and something new has taken its place. I think that's where we're going to be going. It's going to take time.

James Jesso  30:19  
There's a lot that has kind of come up there for me, as you were talking around like the the complexity of the situation and how each different person and demographic is coming at this differently, you know. And then the confusion of what is good or what is not, you know, and then the kind of getting into, you know, like, oh yes, I'm gonna put myself in the pain of this, you know, does that look like being around people? Like, does that mean getting involved in places where, you know, I'm interacting with toxic people, you know, there's, there's all these weird sort of complications. And as I'm listening, I'm I'm I'm efforting to hear it from a larger perspective than what's happening right now, you know, because if I think about generations that suffer, I'd say that right now, my demographic, even my local community, you know, is not suffering nearly as much as people in the hardest hit areas of the United States with covid and not nearly as much as people who are in poverty or who are, you know, are oppressed by systemic racism or sexism or whatever it is. You know, especially, of course, systemic racism is a huge and important issue, and very like strong right now issues of police violence and all the rest. Yeah, but even then, it's like, is, is that I'm just like, trying to, trying to break out of the thinking that wants to immediately point to small examples that don't fit into the larger generational narrative. And I'm wondering if there's, if there's something there that you want to comment on about, about how the what you just said applies to the acute as much as the bigger picture. Yeah, you're

Chris Bache  32:16  
certainly right. I mean, in my local community, we're not suffering, not badly, and I'm retired and I'm the hive, and lost my job, I don't I know where my next meal is coming from. And a lot of people that's not true. And then if we just expand the horizon, the the hundreds of 1000s of people who are migrants, who are ecological, migrants who are fleeing disastrous circumstances, people whose whole lives fit inside a bag, a suitcase that they're carrying everything they value in the world. I mean, it's just the upheaval. We don't have to go very far to find it, but even if it is far from our local community, I live in a strange world in that way. I mean, we all watch television. We all try to keep abreast of the larger patterns that are out there. But inwardly, because of the psychedelic work, because I've been dissolved so many times over so many years into the collective breath of humanity, and because I've been drawn into the collective Shadow Work, The Dark Night of the collective soul work, and have gone far beyond The collective psyche outside, as outside of the Collective Unconscious into larger patterns of time, deep time, evolutionary time, which you might think of as geologic time. My insides are tuned a little differently because I sort of on a smaller scale, when I see human beings, I don't see human beings the way other people tend to see human beings. I see souls. I relate to human beings as incarnations of souls. And so I'm always tuning to the soul quality of a person. And in that respect, for example, we can see young people who are truly old in their heart and mind, and we can see old people who are like children in their hearts and minds and everything in between. So when I think of the people and what we're seeing on the streets and the people riding around and pick up trucks with carrying weapons, and I'm seeing souls that are in a long they're in one phase of a long evolutionary journey at the souls progression. And I have a sense of some approximate sense of the large scale of the self education. Education, self, maturational process, and some of the stage points along that that scale, and I don't bring that as a model that allows me to judge people and rank people and classify people, but I approach people. I approach people knowing that their entire current incarnation is just a short phase of their larger learning process, and so I understand the challenges that they're facing within this larger context, within this larger matrix. The tricky part is you can get so absorbed into large perspectives like that that you can lose the immediate, immediate suffering. You can lose sight of what it actually feels like to be undergoing the privations right here, right now, of many people. So you have to live in both morals at the same time. Yeah, at hand and the large scale, my professional work and my psychedelic work has focused me on the large scale.

James Jesso  36:15  
Chris, I unexpectedly really have to pee. I'm just going to take a take a little me, and I'll be right back.

Speaker 2  36:22  
Okay, okay, wow, okay, so free all of a sudden, much better.

James Jesso  36:29  
Yeah. So there's a lot of inner conflict that's coming up for me as a as I'm listening to you, that part of me is like, yes, and another part of me is like,

James Jesso  36:53  
does this like? It's the smaller wind. It's the smaller frame of like. But does saying it this way? Does that? Does that equate to passivity? Does that equate to, you know? Like, you know, if this is all a part of a larger process, is me just looking at myself, you know, like, is that actually doing anything? I know, if I look at a large picture, yes, of course, it's doing something. You know, I'm whatever, helping to evolve and churn my soul. And by doing good as best I can, I help sort of bring goodness into reality more. And then it can be sort of like in engaged in other people's realities or whatever else. So on the on the one level, I'm like, Yes, but on another level, like, is that really enough? There's a lot of sort of psychedelic rhetoric around, like, if we just gave more people Psilocybin, then we'd stop burning down the rainforest, you know, if we, or say, Ayahuasca, then we stop burning down rainforest. We give people enough Psilocybin, you know, then we'll, we won't vote in authoritarian leaders, right? Yeah. But I think that that that type of thinking, on some level, feels really, it feels really foolish, you know, to think that if I just do the work that's going to make big changes in the world, that that's going to properly address things, and yet, there's this whole other layer, which is like, but can I, Can I really do any good as a part of a social movement if I'm showing up with hatred in my heart and anger and just and projection and just looking for someone to blame for my suffering, you know? And some people are showing up because of that, some, not all. Obviously, I don't think the movements are inspired by this. I think they're inspired by a very appropriate response to injustice. Yeah? And then a whole other layer of me is like, Oh, if I say this wrong, will I be canceled because of that sort of like, yeah, Blamey hatefulness in the heart. So again, these aren't clear questions. I almost like, I feel like I'm just like, baring my soul to you, Chris, like, Help me understand.

Chris Bache  39:05  
I understand. I really do. Because if your spirituality, if your genuine spirituality, leads you away from social engagement in the world, then I don't think it's a very mature spirituality, because mature spirituality leads to that place in the heart where we contact the heart of all living things. And when we contact the heart of all living things, naturally, we want to help all living things. And so the natural progression of deep spiritual work, when it succeeds is to be socially engaged in some form or another, whatever we feel particularly called to some people are called to medicine. They're going to do it in medicine. Some people are doing it with high tech, online, international discussions. Some people they're doing it in all sorts of different ways. But. The important thing is that we find what it is that feels like our niche, our particular contribution to make, and we do it. And you're right, if we do it, when we do it, we'll probably end up finding that maybe we aren't as clean as we thought we were going in. Okay, so we step back, we clean, we work that part. But yeah, I understand the tension it I would feel it more if I were a young man like you. I'm older, and I'm in my 70s, so in some ways, I've had I've made my decisions around those things. I've made my choices, and mostly I'm past that active time. Except as a teacher, you know, I write, I teach, I talk, I do what I can. But other people my age, they're on there, on the front lines, they're much more active on the front lines. They really are plowing those fields. They really they are getting the vote out. They are working very tangibly and practically to bring about a better world.

Chris Bache  41:19  
No standardized rules for the engagement, but we can feel when there's a feeling in our center, when we are aligned with our place in the world and our place in the movement. We've got a balance point between inner and outer, sheltered and exposed, and so we're self correcting that we're self correcting beings. And what's most important, I think, is not rules of inner outer, or how to engage and how, what, what not, what not, but tuning into that point in our center, which is our connecting point to the larger intelligence, which is always trying to draw us towards deeper and deeper levels of engagement with itself, and that means with the fabric of humanity and or non human life forms, as you Say, that are also being affected a million species going extinct, you know, as we stand here, as we sit here, yeah,

James Jesso  42:32  
I've been, I've been sitting with the, you know, we're, we were going to open up your book, and maybe at some point we will. I have been sitting with the first thing I wanted to open the book to the first, the first part of the book that received a red tab, which was particularly important for quoting or reference,

James Jesso  42:53  
as I have coordinated the color coding here and wondering How much it applies

James Jesso  43:00  
in the sort of like the the comparing between a deep psychedelic work or deep psychedelic journey, and the journey that we're on right now as a as an entire planetary organism facing the the Increasing layers of collapse and catastrophe and crisis that is just funneling more and more out of the year of clear vision. And the part is about one of the greatest risks of psychedelic work, as you have put in the book, being ego inflation. And I'm curious looking around at the world, that both people in the psychedelic community, so maybe it's a real micro scale of like this is happening in psi culture, you know, and then the larger scale of like this is what's this is what I'm seeing play out in the in the big characters, like the big characters, like the representations in the media and so on and so forth. Yeah, I'm just curious about your comments on that.

Speaker 3  44:08  
Well,

Chris Bache  44:10  
you know, I'm essentially a hermit, and even though I am a member of the psychedelic community, because I'm involved in psychedelics and thinking about them, and I don't really have a lot of living contact with the psychedelic community. You know, you go to conferences. You know, used to go to conferences. You have workshops here and there. You teach here and there. But the actual number of people from this large community is relatively small. You get impressions from the books. But again, since I'm older, I'm not keeping track with all the latest articles. I really will just pay attention more to the important books that come out, not the small stuff. And so I don't know really what's happening in the psychedelic community. E S, so I can't generalize about that. I think that in some ways, we're moving into a psychedelic period of history, and it may be starting at low dose psychedelic history, but we're going to be moving into high dose psychedelic history when there will in low dose work, you may engage voluntarily. You know the ego dissolution process. In high dose work, you will be engaged whether you volunteer or not. You will be go put through the meat grinder. And I think we're coming into a period of history where right now we may choose how to engage or how to pick the pain, particular pain that we're going to take on. There's going to come a time. It's going to be the Charles choices are going to be made for us. We're going to be surrounded by catastrophic consequences of the historical policies that we set in motion for decades and hundreds of years. So it's going to be, it's truly like a hurricane coming off shore. I mean, this is like everybody's going to be affected. Everybody's going to be touched. It's not going to be a pick and choose situation.

Speaker 3  46:16  
So

Chris Bache  46:19  
I think that the great danger of psychic work is of psychedelic work is psychic inflation. That is, we think we have we've had a deep experience. We think we've become a deep person. We've had a great experience. We think we've become a we are a great being. And that, of course, is a fool's delusion. Whether the psychedelic community is in that position, I don't know, because I think you know, if you do have that attitude, then your own psychedelic sessions are going to knock your feet out from under you harder. It's going to take you down. So you learn pretty quickly that that's a that's a dead end street to go and it becomes much, much more basic than that. And it's not about having extraordinary experiences. To me, it's not about, I mean, it's not about having ecstatic experiences or having to me, it's about doing whatever is necessary so that 48 hours after your session is over, you're living a better life than you did beforehand. So you're either you spend your psychedelic session, either taking a vacation to Italy, or you spend it carrying out the garbage. Carrying out the garbage is what's going to give you a better life two days after your session is over, and if you carry out the garbage, well, then you're going to see some extraordinary things on the other side. So for me, the real work is carrying out the garbage, that's I mean. And so why would you ever want to become more conscious than we already are? If the consequence of being more cost conscious is to take more responsibility for the garbage that you are part of, it's in your system and it's immediately around you. So when you become more conscious, you're going to have to do more cleaning. So for some, I know that other people don't necessarily feel that way. For them, psychedelics are a way to, you know, access joy. And you know, you access great joy, great things, but when you come by those great joyful experiences of communion or great cosmic insights that flow into you when you come by them through hard work, then I don't think it then tends to lead to psychic inflation so much because you know the price you've paid to receive these blessings. You you understand the deeper process, and that the intelligence that gave you the blessings is teaching you is, you know, taking you along, step by step. And so you these blessings are not given out lightly, but they're given out intentionally. And if your if your psychedelic work is is really disciplined, and it's really part of a spiritual practice for you, then everything that you're given is also laying the foundation for work that you're going to do and gifts you will be given later, because your entire relationship with the universe is one of the maturational development, and once you kind of feel the rhythm of this maturational development over the course of years. Years in your work, then that just puts aside, it draws to a close, all this sort of psychic inflation bullshit. Because it you know that that's just ego dancing, and ego

Speaker 3  50:20  
is the obstacle,

James Jesso  50:23  
the the question that's kind of like me, we've kind of done this interesting, sort of, like dance and quasi pivot, you know, from these, like, big, sort of global crises, acute issues that we're in right now and then, sort of like, sort of like a larger cosmological perspective of the transformation of the human soul over millennia, ultimately, and that possibly we're in the we're in the beginning of this great, painful, suffering churning that will eventually Polish us up on the other side to becoming What in the book you call the future human, and now we're sort of, like, back into that, kind of, like, we've pivoted into, like, direct psychedelic work. And I don't know if this question feels, I don't know if this question is, is sort of almost, um, like, trite in a way, because it's, so general or what, but I'm just holding it, and it feels like I gotta ask it, which is given where we are, given what's happening. And maybe you've already said this, you've already answered this somehow, but given where we are from the perspective of the deep psychedelic work that you've done, you know, what does it mean to be a good person right now? What is it? What does it mean to be what does it take, you know, yeah, man,

Chris Bache  51:57  
it's a large question. I

Chris Bache  52:16  
I think of a half dozen ways to answer that question pop into my mind, and all of them are wrong, so I'm kind of sifting through layers. I

Chris Bache  52:43  
in some of my deepest experiences, there are moments, there are times when, and even after a session, but under the influence of the learning of a session, when something just falls away, something opens

Chris Bache  53:12  
and I experience the world truly as living and Breathing as one. I feel like my feet are rooted in the earth the way a tree is rooted in the earth. I look down at the grass, and I feel complete continuity of being between everything around me and my own being. I feel us breathing the same air. I feel us all different species sharing the same moment in time. I feel the pulse of the universe in its utter simplicity, not paying attention to any of our divisions of species or moods or incarnations or anything like that, the entire universe just being itself, and I am part of that in grateful it's not even communion, because communion implies a subtle duality, and this is when all of that falls away and a great transparency of being opens. From within that position,

Chris Bache  54:41  
I experience an opening of my mind, kind of a delicious sense of presence. It gives me an intimacy with grass. And then at a deeper level, I experience an opening of my heart. Art in which the idea of harming anyone is the farthest thing from my mind, and the idea of helping everyone is the most natural thing in the world. It's not being good, it just it's it's being alive within this reality of oneness. So to me, goodness is simply an approximation, or it's a, it's a it's a compass needle that points in the direction of this fundamental truth of oneness. And the truth of oneness is all these derivatives that flow from it circumstances. But at essence, it's very, very simple. And I think compassion, goodness, in that way, fairness, justice, are all aspects of oneness. Are all kind of fractal manifestations of oneness. So what does it take to be a good person today? I think it takes a willingness, a commitment, to serving a collective good to serving a good that's not private, that opens up to future generations, that opens up to people who are unlike me and species who are unlike me, just an honest confrontation with What is in order to bring about a better life for other beings. I know this is very simple, but to me, goodness is is is simple. It is that simple. It gets complicated in the enacting of it, but in the at its core, it. It's an action that comes out of oneness, and if it's not coming out of a deep grounding in oneness, then maybe there's something not to trust in it, because deep goodness comes out of oneness. I think. Now I don't know if this really addresses the depth out of which your question is coming, because I understand

Speaker 3  57:28  
the true,

Chris Bache  57:32  
the true angst, not angst, but the true kind of quandary from which that question comes, but the deepest answer I have in response to it, I'm afraid, is just a mystical experience, a mystical experience of oneness, in which that context goodness just becomes an insignificant component, a spontaneous component, just like the way you react when you see something beautiful. It's just, it's an arising. It comes up inside of you. Goodness is simply an arising that comes up inside of you when you're in the condition of oneness.

James Jesso  58:17  
I have a, have a, maybe a more sort of serious response, and I have a more joking response. And the more serious response is along the lines of, like, what, what does it what does it look like to what does the dance look like? You said, it becomes difficult in the enactment. You know, what does the dance look like between Okay, having that experience? Because I've had that experience, and I can tell you fully 100% honestly, that anywhere from 10% of the time to 99% of the time, I'm not there at all. There's no sense of it whatsoever in my experience, you know, and I am and I'm not in the ground of that as I'm as I'm as I'm showing up in the world. And I'm wondering, yeah, you know, in the same way that also the playful response was, so we all should all take 500 mics of LSD, right? No, no, in the what does it look like to have had that experience? Because the way that you speak about it, and I think naturally, it makes sense, like when you're there, goodness just flows from you, right? It is the most organic and natural expression of being in the world is when you're coming from that place. And yet having a deep and profound experience doesn't make you a deep and profound person. Experiencing oneness doesn't mean that you now walk through the world inspired and infused in all your actions. You know oneness just streams from your fingertips, and every interaction is a blessing with the world from the depth of the oneness. I have embodied simply by taking enough mushrooms to touch it once. So what does it look like then? I mean, maybe this is a question around integration, yeah, what does it mean to remember that, and what is it into to catch ourselves in forgetting?

Chris Bache  1:00:18  
Yeah, that's that is, you know, we we go up on the mountain, we see some things, we may be given some blessings, and then we come down, and then we have to go to work on Monday morning. And that's over and over again. It means a matter of constantly engaging, being aware of how you're engaging, checking yourself, recommitting yourself to doing a better job, over and over and over again. For me, much of it was in my work as a teacher you know, constantly, always enjoying it, always loving to be with the students, always wanting to do it better, but constantly catching myself making assumptions, making false inferences, not doing a good enough job, being a little tired, letting my students down on a particular day, coming back and trying to do better, coming do better the next day, Do better, the next week, better the next semester, over and over again, trying to live up to the things that we know to be true. Integration is a is a strange term. I'm not sure. I'm glad that the psychedelic community is paying more attention to integration, because it's really, really critical. But and there are dimensions and aspects of integration, and the word integrate carries us a certain distance, doesn't, doesn't carry us so far, but it's it's hard to live our visions. It's hard to live the truth of what we've seen. It because it commits you to constantly being aware, if you take the time to remit to pay attention to yourself, how bad a job we're doing at living those truths. But that's just, that's the nature of the beast, though we just it's constantly I mean, if we are, if we live around people who are really good, people who really have a deeper natural instinct for goodness and kindness and generosity than we have, then it makes it easier just to sort of face our own shortcomings, because we have someone that we can look at and say, Ah, that person doing this better than I do. So this gives me a measuring stick. I can do better. I'll do it better tomorrow. I'll keep working on it. And that's why, you know, in the Buddhist tradition, spiritual friends, people who are also have committed themselves to awakening. That's really one of the great Sangha community is one of the great pillars of progress. So, yeah, you're right. It's wonderful to have the experience, but we don't walk around in that state, but we practice and practice and practice, and then maybe 10 years later, we were in a little bit more. 10 years later, maybe we're in it a little bit more, but practice and practice and practice. And if we ever think that we're really there, then all we do is ask our young children, and they'll remind us that we're not really there as far along as we think we are, our our kids will set us straight.

James Jesso  1:03:45  
Or perhaps, or perhaps we could, I think it was a Baba Ram Dass said, If you ever think you're spiritually awake and go spend a week at your parents or something like that. So maybe it's the other way around.

Chris Bache  1:03:56  
Yes, yes, as

James Jesso  1:03:58  
you were speaking, I it was funny, because a question started forming, and then you had said something that I was like, Oh, great. I can point to exactly that to ask this question, which is around, you know, being around people, spiritual friends, right? The question is, partly goes back to what you said around, like, if your spiritual practice means running away from, like, not engaging in the world, then it's probably not a very mature spiritual practice. And I agree and respect that very much. And then so there's a balance between, you know, like being in these spiritual having spiritual friends and so on and so forth, but then not isolating oneselves and only that experience, but also engaging in being in the world right, or being right in the world of the world, Pardon, pardon the reference. Yeah, yeah. But then, right now, it feels as though, and I think in many ways, this is because so much of our social interaction is mediated by screens and the info. Of social media technology, as well as the influence that, in one way or another, every interaction we have is also informed by, is that person a loaded covid gun or whatever it is, it's, it's, it's inspired by this sort of weird things. We have this situation where we're not coming together, right? And so there's a lot of toxic interaction. There's a lot of charged emotional charge, a lot of embodied emotional energy that's very tense. You know, there's a lot of being exposed to how shit the world actually is, right? Now. There's a lot of beauty in the world, of course, but that's not what we're having shoved down our down our throats, or shoved through our eyes and so. So the actual interactions with the world, be they screen, mediated or not, is now in this landscape of a lot of people, understandably so, very contorted by the situation, very contorted by the context. And it's in that, you know, in that contortion, that we generally aren't operating from oneness, right? So save for isolating ourselves and only our little friend group, that everyone's spiritual and with the oneness and yada yada, which ultimately is serving those people there, but only to a certain extent, and not anybody else, and then being sort of in the world, trying to be a person of goodness and oneness, but encountering a lot of toxicity and close mindedness and shunning and and cancel and all the rest. Like, how does a person walk this? What does that walk look like?

Chris Bache  1:06:42  
It's good question, isn't it good question? It's going to look different for you than it will for me, and it'll look different for different people in different circumstances.

Chris Bache  1:06:58  
I mean, I really years ago, decades ago, my life was as real as my students. And so wherever I was on the weekends, however deep I was on the weekends, whatever spiritual practice I was doing at six o'clock on Monday morning, at 10 o'clock, I was with my class, and I was teaching in an open enrollment University, people who were first generation college educated in a burned out steel town where opportunities were few and far between, and this was front line education in America. And you, you it was hard work, and we worked hard together, so I had to be on my game, engaging the world in my role as educator, constantly confronting their assumptions, encountering the engaging the biases that they would bring to the discussions of the topics that as A professor of religious studies, I was teaching, and so, you know, I would laugh at my friends tease my friends who were teaching graduate courses, maybe three graduate courses a year at their institutions where I was teaching nine quarter courses an academic year and then courses During the summer. It's really different kind of world. So if I were answering your question 15 years ago, when that was my life, the hermit quality of my life would be balanced by my particular slice of the pie that I was responsible for, which is helping these young people come to deepen an understanding of the world and of themselves in the disciplines that I was teaching. Now I'm in a different time of my life. Now I am out of that world. Now I am retired from that world and so and I buffer myself from a lot of screen time. I really don't engage. I mean, I really like you say it is so toxic, it is so confused. I don't think it helps me to immerse myself in that toxic confusion. It doesn't help me maintain the clarity that it's my responsibility to maintain in my life, so that when I do engage people, I can be useful to people coming out of the space that I've that I am most comfortable with or not most comfortable but I most appreciate.

Speaker 3  1:09:43  
So

Chris Bache  1:09:45  
I don't have to engage people nearly as much as you do, and not nearly as much of people who are going to work nine to five, they're front line on the covid scene, and they're riding a bus, they're riding a train, and they're having to make all these. Decisions about who and what, and what can I say, and where should I sit, and how do I breathe, and all those things. But the principle is always the same. I mean Teresa. Mother, Teresa, she worked with the poorest of the poor. She started her work by basically dragging people off the streets of Calcutta so that they could die with dignity in some small place. We engage the world as we are, as it is, as circumstances are right now the circumstances is this pandemic that we are involved in, and the political polarization that's being generated by that pandemic, people are grabbing that world from so many different places, so Many places, that

Chris Bache  1:11:00  
generalities are hard to come by, except I come back again to that sense of inner integrity that kind of tells us when we are on and off course with ourselves, whether we are aligned with our with our deep being, Whether we're out of kilter with our deep being, and even in my isolation, I have the feeling of whether I am aligned with my deep being or whether I am not aligned with it, in terms of, Am I living myself my life in a way that will put me in the position to be of maximum benefit when I give this talk in two weeks, or something like that, that it's not something that happens on the day of presentation. It's a whole. It's with your life. It's an is in tuned with your deepest aspirations and your deepest truths of what you know and believe, so that when you are called upon, you truly have something to give, which is yours to give, and that that that tuning into that center place takes place whether you're in the subway or whether you're at home by yourself. It's just tartar in the subway.

James Jesso  1:12:23  
Yeah, I think, I think one of the things that's coming up for me is something along the lines of, you,

Speaker 3  1:12:47  
what that looks like for different people,

James Jesso  1:12:50  
and what that looks like for different people looks like to me from where I'm coming from, based on where they're coming from, because there are people in this world who feel like they are doing exactly that, and what they're doing is putting, you know, taking their guns out for walks and screaming At people for wearing masks, right? Or they feel like they're doing that thing, but what they're actually doing is propagating neo Nazi white supremacy. Or what they're actually they think that they're doing that thing, but what they're actually doing is something emotionally violent, immature and toxic, which is canceling and anybody who disagrees with them and feeling reinforced in the righteousness of their beliefs by other people on the internet agreeing with them and them all bonding by bullying this person who has a different opinion from them, right? And that they feel like they're doing the good thing too. And so I want to be able to say that I know that me not doing those things is me doing the good thing, and that my inclination is to think that what they're doing is not the good thing. But then am I? Am I invisibly making myself a fool to think that I understand what goodness is, and that my goodness is more good than their good. You know, is, there is, is, I mean, there's that question, and then there's a larger question of like, is it all good? You know, is actually them doing that good? Because goodness exists larger than the frame of reference of what might, of what our immediate sort of like, acute socio political, even life span, time frame seems to state is good because we're incapable of recognizing, let alone the second and third order consequences of our of our decisions. But the 50th, 60th, the the seven generations, consequence of our thinking, you know, is all of this good, and if all of this is good, then what does it matter? What I do?

Chris Bache  1:15:14  
Once again, you're pushing into deep territory, you know, in the in the highest level of Buddhist teachings in Tibetan, Buddhist teachings in Dzogchen, they would basically radically qualify goodness or the good that you know it's like, doesn't make any difference whether you're doing good or not doing good. If you're truly aligned with the absolute essence of all things, it puts you in a different kind of category in relative to good and not good, but until you are living into that, in that absolute condition, best to do good, you know, because that's the closest approximation we have to that absolute condition. And I think one of the things that so I'm not willing, though it is from that perspective, one could relatively profoundly relativize good, and I understand that my own personal orientations doesn't go in that direction, to say it's all good. I mean, I understand that it could be that we all think we're doing good, but I'm not willing to say that all that we are doing is all good, and one of the things is injuring other people, injuring other people, physically, psychologically. That, to me, is a marker of not good. That's one of the places where you draw the line, because oneness is all embracing and and it, and the first rule that comes out of that is non injury. I think the people who are doing the things that you describe, they had been doing it for a long time, but right now, they're doing it more publicly than they were doing it before. Before it may have been more private and surreptitious and individual, but now they've been given permission in this greater social reinforcement and platforms on social media that reinforce an echo chamber and whatnot that reinforce those patterns. But the fact that people are self selecting and reinforcing different patterns and all of that's taking place, doesn't mean that there aren't still choices of good for goodness to be made, and it doesn't mean that goodness is eliminated as a reasonable and rational and spiritually rich criterion for which To look at our behavior and ourselves doing various things, lynching, even though it may be believed as being good is not good, it's a it is a not good, and a lot of people Who did it believed that they were doing good.

Speaker 3  1:18:01  
Ah, when

Chris Bache  1:18:14  
we wake up, when we begin to wake up through which whatever means when we are touched by a passage from scripture, or whether we're touched in an arc in an Ayahuasca session, in whatever form, when we wake up constantly, over and over again, genuine waking up produces gentler people. It produces Kinder people, more compassionate people. It doesn't improve. It doesn't produce homophobic people. It doesn't produce people who are violence and inflicting violence on other people. It always produces gentler, more respectful people. Now that doesn't mean that doesn't mean that we necessarily don't fight for justice, and we don't confront injustice as with what force we need to but the core balance is towards an equality of that the that has a gentle component to it, a compassionate component. So then the question becomes, how do you confront the not good? Knowing all the things we know about how people believe that they are doing good, how do we confront the not good in a way which doesn't perpetuate evil or doesn't encourage more divisions in the world? That's obviously very, very difficult question, and only can be done piece by piece, by the person, in circumstances, in specific circumstances. If I step back and try to generalize, then I'm just, I'm just blowing smoke. You know, this can only. Be done from really people who are living in the circumstances and making decision whether to go to the protest, whether to counter protests, how to address violence when it meets you on the street, so on and so forth.

Speaker 3  1:20:18  
Do you think that the but the what feels like the the

James Jesso  1:20:29  
almost ubiquitous rise of what is often called Bad Faith arguments and the almost total

Speaker 3  1:20:38  
devolution destruction of discourse

James Jesso  1:20:44  
as a consequence of basically all conflict being received of and responded to as a form of abuse.

Speaker 3  1:20:55  
How?

James Jesso  1:21:00  
I'm not sure what the question is here.

Speaker 3  1:21:06  
What is the question here?

Speaker 3  1:21:13  
What role do you see? What role do you see conversation, open discourse between the various expressions of self perceived good

James Jesso  1:21:32  
as playing in the evolutionary process we're in as as humans and

Speaker 3  1:21:42  
and how do you balance that with the the

James Jesso  1:21:48  
understandable limitation of, well, I'm not really particularly interested in giving a voice or a space for a hateful racist or a hateful, whatever, and a violent person to have a voice. I don't want to speak to them. I don't think that they should have something to say. What is, what is the balance there in the course of doing good and trying to bring about goodness in this world?

Chris Bache  1:22:35  
That is a large question, again, a huge question, of which I have a very limited framework from within to respond to it. Partly here, my background is I'm an academic. And I'm an academic in the history of religious thought, in the history of philosophical thought, in a discipline that prizes engagement, it prizes discussion, it prizes collaboration and conflict as a vehicle for determining greater truth. I've gone through multiple revolutions in my own thinking, the hardest pivot in when you move from a worldview with certain sets of assumptions and a certain way of seeing the world, the hardest pivot is the first one, because that's when you let go of a sense of being grounded in reality and you have to step back and when you pivot in certain fundamental beliefs, then you suddenly realize that what you had taken as reality was just a model of reality, and you're dealing with models and models when the second and third and fourth time you make that pivot, as you continue to shift and grow, it does get easier, because You realize you know, you discover that you're living within a matrix of assumptions, a paradigm of assumptions. So I've gone through being a conventional Christian to being a non Christian, to being deeply informed by science and the scientific worldview to challenging some of the core axioms of a reductive materialist interpretation of science through the psychedelic work, and I've been in dialog with people all the years, all these stages, not only my students, but all the faculties and colleagues and People who I've spent my entire academic career, disagreeing with and still managing to be friends with and working with students and allowing them to voice opinions in the room, which I find abhorrent, and yet it's essential for them to be able to express the. Themselves, if there's ever going to be a chance of opening up a possibility that they can see the world from a little different perspective. But all of that is within a certain frame of reference in which there is a set of rules about the give and take and the limits of give and take what's happening today is a very different world in this sheltered world that I've been functioning in inside a university. This is, as you say, it's a dissolution of standards. It is a radicalization of everyone's got the right to their own position, and every position is as valuable as any other. And in the end, it comes down to might makes right, or the vote of the majority, however coerced and contrived, that is, this a very different world. And when I tried to fathom that world, I think we are living in a time. I mean, we know it. We're in a time of paradigm change. We are in a time when certainties are becoming uncertainties, constants are dissolving. So many reference points that people have used to orient themselves are being changed. I mean, science changed so much, and now science has changed itself so much. When it began to point to 96% of reality is invisible, dark matter and dark energy. How the hell do we live in a universe like that? How do we live in a universe as big as the universe is we're describing. All the religions of the world have all come together in one valley. It's like rivers have come together into one valley, and just meeting each other as we have in the last two centuries, has forced, for anyone who's paying attention, has forced a radical reassessment of all of our truth claims, of all of the certainties that we've had about what we know to be true, and what we know God is doing with the world and what and when we look when just in this complexity of plurality that we're dealing with, just within a mindset of disciplines, it opens up, it taps into this deep, deep uncertainty that, well, maybe we really don't know what God wants, and maybe we really don't know what the truth is. And maybe we really have to go look not only in our sacred scriptures, but in their sacred scriptures, and in their sacred scriptures to even begin to deal with some type of approximation that might become more adequate than it was before. And so many of these things are missing right now, this sort of self awareness of the limitations of one's paradigm, of our cultural embeddedness that's missing from much of this discussion so but we see it all in acting out. We're at a time of a falling apart of values. We can't even count on nature to be whole patterns that it had held for us for all these centuries. The weather patterns are different, the rain patterns are different, the heat patterns are different. Not even nature is allowing us to stay in the comfortable domain. Immigration patterns are different. Racial balances in our country are different. So many differences, so many things. People are scared, people are unstable, people are grabbing they're hiring to hold on to. And from one perspective, you can say yes, yes, yes, good luck with that, because it's going to keep falling apart. It's going to keep getting worse. And if you're not able to deal with that. You're going to suffer enormously. If you keep trying to hold on to old values, you're going to suffer terribly, and you're going to cause suffering, and that suffering is going to come back on you. To me, it's not just that the world is a dirty and uglier place than the academic university is because the academic university can be a pretty, dirty and ugly place in its own form, in its own genre, but underneath our culture, the constants are falling away. The legs are being kicked out from under the table. This just tremendous uncertainty, and truth has been a casualty of that. Truth has been a casualty of that process as well a sense of feeling truth.

Speaker 3  1:29:35  
But

Chris Bache  1:29:37  
we'll get through it. We have no other choice, because this is a truth that we live in. We live in a pluralistic society. We live in a sexually pluralistic society. We live in a in a society of multiple truths. We live in a culture of multiple truths. We live in a world of expanding truths, of just expanding horizons, over and over and over again. It's very uncomfortable. To live in such a fluid world, but if we're not good at it now, we better get good at it within the next generation or two, because this is not going to change. We're not going to go back into the tried and comfortable world of the past. We are only going forward into new and uncertain territory, and we're going into it together. We have to kind of grow up.

Chris Bache  1:30:35  
We have to grow up. We have to stop acting and arguing like adolescents. We have to start acting and arguing like adults, and adults have a time horizon and a perspective that you don't have when you're an adolescent, and adults can hold their temper more and they don't cause injury like adolescents do. And so it's grow up or die time. We have to grow up. We have to stand up. We have to measure up

Speaker 3  1:31:16  
to this,

Chris Bache  1:31:19  
to the higher demands of growing truth. Yeah, because truth is growing, truth is expanding, we're trying to keep up with it hard time.

James Jesso  1:31:36  
Yeah, this, this whole conversation. I just, I mean, I keep throwing really hard questions at you, and incredibly, I'm just, or increasingly, like, this is all so difficult. I mean, you think these questions are difficult, the fact that we even are asking them means we're in a reality that is far more difficult than even just looking and forming the questions, right?

Chris Bache  1:31:55  
And you're asking me questions about things I don't really know much about. I mean,

James Jesso  1:32:01  
ask me, What about that? I wrote a book about I know it's so funny. I thought I was gonna ask you about psychedelics. I'm sitting here, I feel like I'm in satsang or something, and you're just like, what does it mean to be a good person? Grace. How do I face the meta crisis?

Chris Bache  1:32:13  
Yeah, well, we're all in this together. We are all in together. All your listeners and all the people who are not listening, we're all in it together. No What's wonderful about this conversation, and the conversations that you encourage is that it pushes beach bulls boundaries in a safe and respectful way. It invites them to become more self reflective, more self aware. It invites them to read more books and to learn more and to become less reactive and more integrated in their presence. That is a mode of it's not just the content that comes from these kind of discussions, which can be useful to people, but the mode of the conversation itself, the mode of disciplined inquiry. It's, you know, yes, you read the books, you've done your homework. You know what the issues are that we're going to talk about. But the quality of engagement is itself a model for how we need to do to move forward where we're going, you know. And that's a great value.

James Jesso  1:33:20  
Well, thank you. I kind of feel like I recognize that in myself, in the sense of what I'm attempting to produce and also in what I'm consuming. I'm, you know, like I'm kind of just coming out of this place where my response to all of this at first was like, okay, my nervous systems on overload. I'm going to play Playstation, and I'm going to just like, do the absolute bare minimum of just like I had a bunch of podcast things recorded, and I was just like, doing the bare minimum, just trying to do the podcast all recorded out. And then at some point, increasingly, I'm removing myself, because I don't have the ability to participate in the generative social discussions I previously was a part of in my community in the same way, and I'm looking to find myself and surround myself the type of quality of conversation and topic of conversation and and angle of addressing the topic and the quality, because otherwise, you know, I am the five people I spend most time with or, I mean, that's a pretty strong generalization, but if the five people I'm spending most time with is whatever happens to be trending on Twitter and and Facebook, Which is like, the algorithms basically push for, like, maximum attention, maximum attention grabbing, and what Tristan Harris calls like a race to the bottom of the brain stem, and it's all limbic hijacking and all the rest and the it's, it's just like a it's just a dynamic of outrage in one way. Or another, then that's the world I'm in, and that's the way I'm gonna engage things. And I see that I want the podcast to be something different. You know, it's psychedelic, I mean, but it's not, you know, it's like, it is about psychedelics, but it's more about being someone who uses psychedelics and has a psychedelic perspective, trying to make sense of life in real life. And I'm trying to also surround myself with the types of conversations and discussions and topics that are helping me stay in that so I can keep being a part of and contributing to that kind of world. Because I'm looking at this, this balance somebody I've been really listening to a lot recently, Daniel schmactenberger talked about trying to, well, it's kind of hard to really know if I ever understand what he's saying, because he's saying, because he's I feel like he's way too smart for me, or I'm not smart enough, or something. You know, it's real humbling listening to talk, listening to him talk something along the lines of, like, trying to find that place between, you know, recognizing what's it, what's going wrong with the world, and all the things going wrong, and what am I actually able to do? Like, what am I actually able to do? Yeah, rather than trying to solve what's wrong with the world, being like, Okay, I got a sense of it. But what am I actually able to do? And, and right now, it feels like this is what I'm actually able to do.

Chris Bache  1:36:18  
Yeah, I understand that, and I don't do Twitter feeds, I don't do Instagram. I spend very little time in social media altogether. So at the cost, at the risk, of separating myself from the pulse of where people are. Where I Live is not where most people live, and one of the reasons I live in a different place is because of psychedelics. When I when I experience what's happening, it's within a different historical horizon than most people experience what's happening, and when I am concerned for the people who are suffering, even that is from a different perspective, because of the psychedelic experiences that have taught me to recognize the different levels of being that are present in a human body, the Different levels of soul inside a human body, and then to recognize even the different levels of soul maturation which are in a species in an historical period and that's contextualized within an intimate experience of the aliveness of the universe, that the universe is alive at core, in every blade of grass and every every gyration of the planets, in the movement of the galaxies, it is alive and its intelligence. And its intelligence is constantly knocking on the back of our mind, constantly asking for permission to enter and to infuse us more with its understanding, to attend that deeply to The invitation that the universe gives us requires stepping out of Twitter feeds and Instagram feeds and this buzz, buzz, buzz, which is important, but if you want to, it's like if you want to understand where we are in our universe and where we are in the galaxy and where our galaxy is, you have to go out at night under a dark sky with no surrounding lights and and let your eyes adjust to the darkness and stay focused there for a long time, and then listen very carefully. And it's the same way with inner knowing. Inner knowing requires a stepping back out of the give and take of daily discourse, tuning in deeply. And I've been blessed in that I've my life has afforded me an unusual amount of time to do that without taking on monk's robes. You know that's so my whole experience of the challenges that we're facing, all of them, are really not based on earthly wisdom. You know, there's, I try to frame it as best I can, earthly wisdom, but my framing, my deepest understanding of what's, what are really the challenges that are we're facing, and what's really driving the social context that we're in? You know, they come out of my psychedelic work. They come out of a very, very different perspective than even a time space perspective. Or I would say that the time space perspective is. Is at best 50% at best 50% and the other 50% or more really comes out of an intimacy, I don't want to say, with the divine, because that brings us back to the culture wars. How do we define God? But in so that's why I talk about the mind of the universe and intimacy with the generative intelligence of the universe, an intimacy with the creative intelligence of the universe that, to some degree, has taken me under its wing, because I was willing to pay the dues to snuggle up inside there and

Chris Bache  1:40:57  
You never look at life again,

Speaker 3  1:40:59  
as you know,

Chris Bache  1:41:02  
after you've been into those intimate places, when you've been dissolved into the into the deepest pulse of life that you've ever known, you never experience life the same way again. And if you've, if you've nurtured a deep and long connection to this deeper knowing which Transcendence history in a profound way.

Chris Bache  1:41:35  
You never, you never experience life the same way as you did before. You now have a It's not like you have the answers or you have the knowledge which solves things, but there is a there's an intimacy.

Chris Bache  1:42:04  
It makes you very sensitive to how much fear drives things. And when you, when you've dissolved all the fear that you've ever been asked to dissolve, when you, when you dissolve all of that. And you enter into those territories which in which there is no fear and there is only truth and only insight and only understanding and only love and compassion. Then when you come back out of that and you look at life around you, so much of it is driven by fear and so little understanding, and so many people are afraid of dying, and so many people are afraid of losing this, that and the other, because underneath it, they're fundamentally afraid for their own existence, for their just they're afraid of dying. And if you lose that, if you are no longer afraid of dying, and you're no longer afraid of that deep destructuring, whether or not you are challenged by short term destructuring or not, you come at it from a very different perspective. You just live it from a different way. So to me, you know, LSD in the mind of the universe is a psychedelic memoir. It's a whole life's work that is reflected there. It's a it's a journey. That's why I like the title diamonds from Heaven better, because it it's a story of a journey of deepening intimacy. And when you, when you come out of that, you I remember when I would do a session, and at the end of the session, someone I would pick me up at the end of the day and take me to where I would be that night. And once in a while, we had to go buy a grocery store. And as you can imagine, there are few places stranger to be than an American grocery store after you've come down from a serious psychedelic session, it's like being in Disneyland. I mean, it's like in the strange, strange world, something as simple as a grocery store can be that's our work, though, isn't it? When we go into this space, we enter into deeper intimacy with whatever it is that's driving the universe, and then we come back and we try to live our lives as best as we can. This is what reincarnation does. Reincarnation plunges into. It pulls us out, connects us to spiritual reality again, plunges us back in, and then we go out again and back and forth and back and forth. A psychedelic session will do the same thing, but on a smaller orbit. It basically kills the earthly life. It shatters the earthly life and opens us up to what it's like to die into this great surrounding world. Old, and then after the session, we come back and we're alive inside time and space again. And then a few months later, we'll shatter out into outside time and space. So we're reproducing, reenacting the dynamic of nature in reincarnation and whatnot. Once you do that enough times, and once you incarnate enough times, then you you cease to to relate to the world the way you did before. And in much of this aberrant social behavior that we see around us, what I see is so much

Speaker 3  1:45:41  
youth. Is

Chris Bache  1:45:43  
so much inexperience, is so much naivete, maybe badness, but more than badness, I see something that makes me feel terribly sad. I see people not knowing better? And if you ask, why don't they know better? At core, I'm looking at a soul, and I think, why does this soul not know better? And at core of that, it's like Jesus. They're babies, they're children, they're adolescents, they just haven't matured enough to really understand the deep reciprocity that exists between human beings, which leads to a respect of human beings, no matter what they are, no matter who they are.

Speaker 3  1:46:40  
That's well,

Chris Bache  1:46:44  
that's childishness, really. And psychedelics grow us up. I mean, if you do them right, if you use them carefully, they accelerate our maturation. They don't make us perfect, and they don't fill us up with, you know, eternal truths, but they do force us to become more mature than we were in the beginning, if we if we engage them responsibly,

James Jesso  1:47:15  
well, that might be a good place to call to a close. Feel like that was a really great way to end.

Speaker 3  1:47:22  
Chris, I want to thank you for

James Jesso  1:47:26  
sitting down and addressing a bunch of questions that a couple, maybe a little bit for the most part. 80% of this had nothing to do with your book. I didn't even open it up as to what's the plan. And I really asked you to go to the edge of your thinking. I feel like I really asked you to go to the edge of your thinking today on some difficult questions. And I feel really, I feel really nourished by what came of it, and I trust that my listeners will will feel the same, or at the very least something, something will come up worthy of talking about. So I really appreciate your time today, Chris,

Chris Bache  1:48:00  
you bet I trust our conversations. I trust what comes out of them. I trust where they go. I hope they're useful to the people who tend to tune into your podcast. It's always a joy to talk with you.

James Jesso  1:48:14  
James, thank you, Chris. I'm going to show your book here for those who are watching on the YouTube LSD and the mind of the universe. It's a very good book, and

Chris Bache  1:48:24  
I'm going to put a plug in for a book of a friend of mine, because if, if you are concerned about the birth of the future human, and if you're concerned with the historical crisis that we are entered, and you want deeper understanding, my book gives a psychedelic vision of where we are and where we're going. But this book, let's see if I had, is it showing here?

James Jesso  1:48:45  
Yeah, I see it choosing Earth, humanity's great transition to a mature planetary civilization.

Chris Bache  1:48:51  
Yeah, Dwayne Nelda, and you can see, it's not a big book, it's a thin book. It won't take you a lifetime to read it really, really, really fine book, looking at where we are, where we're going, and how to navigate the times we're entering.

James Jesso  1:49:06  
Very kind book. Cool. Thanks for the suggestion, Chris. Last thing, is there anywhere, given how damning we were of social media throughout the course of this interview, are there places on social media that you'd like to direct people towards?

Speaker 2  1:49:18  
Well,

Chris Bache  1:49:20  
in a couple of months, they can go to Chris bache.com the website will eventually appear there. I'm so, I'm so social media. Out of it, I don't, haven't fulfilled my responsibility to have the website up and done. They can reach me at my university email address, which is cm Bache, my initial cm bache@ysu.edu they can contact me there for the time being, but in a couple of months they'll be able to go to Chris bache.com Great.

James Jesso  1:49:55  
Well. Thank you very much, Chris, and looking forward to the next conversation. Me too, James. Is always a head cut. Okay, thank you for tuning in. Check out Chris's book. LSD, in the mind of the universe. It's beautiful. I loved it, as you can see here. You know, so many tabs, so many underlines. I loved it. I also love talking with Chris. So he's a great guy. He's seemingly a great guy, and he's got a lot of wisdom, and check out his book. Additionally, if you like this episode, you can share it with a friend, and if you'd like to support the show financially, Patreon is a great option, where you can pledge a monthly an amount to be sent forth monthly, as little as a cup of coffee once a month. Everything is something, and it all adds up to allow me to earn income while dedicating myself full time to the show and to the larger body of psychedelic research that I'm putting into and out into the world. And I had mentioned there was a special announcement after the interview, so I'll just let it out now, which is that I'm going to be taking a two episode break for the next little while. So if you're new to the show, is a great opportunity to go back through the archives. If you're not new to the show, I will be releasing some content patrons. I just released an update on the Patreon feed just for you, which includes some insider information, but also includes some exclusive content that's just going to be for you guys as well. And yeah, so I'm taking a two episode break to sort of like clean house metaphorically, not so much literally. My house is pretty good, but definitely metaphorically. And yeah, so that's all, thanks for tuning in, thanks for listening all the way to the end, and I will see you on the next episode of adventures through the mind. And until then, take care. You. You.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
