Unknown Speaker  0:00  
Foreign

Richard Rudd  0:18  
welcome everyone to a series of talks that I'm doing here with my friend Chris Bache, and we're going to be discussing a subject that we're both really interested in and fascinated by, which is rebirth and all the things that go along with rebirth. Might also call it reincarnation, because that's part of the story. And this began really because I read Chris, a book by Chris, a wonderful book called LSD and the mind of the universe and and what it did is it kind of just triggered a real recognition in me. And since I'm a teacher of spiritual matters and I'm the founder of a system called the gene keys, that resonance that went off in me, it caused me to reach out via email to this amazing man, and you never know whether you're going to hear back from in those instances. And Chris, very kindly, got back to me, and we started a series of dialogs and discussions, and we realized that we we really enjoyed having dialogs together, so that's why we're here, and we're going to explore this subject in several sessions. So today we're going to just begin with some introductory concepts and basics and and then see where it leaves us. So I hope you enjoy it, and I'm very much looking forward to it.

Chris Bache  1:53  
So we're anticipating three discussions

Richard Rudd  1:56  
Absolutely. So Chris, if you want to say a few things about yourself, just so that, yeah, people know who you are.

Chris Bache  2:03  
It's a pleasure to be here, and I've enjoyed our conversations that we've had prior to this and this, our this present dialog grew out of those earlier conversations. I am a Professor of Philosophy and Religious Studies. I'm on the religious studies side of the shop. I'm retired from Youngstown State University. In the course of my teaching, I've taught courses on world religions and Eastern religions and Transpersonal psychology of religion and comparative mysticism, Buddhism. So I've been teaching in areas touching on reincarnation for many years. I've written several books. My first one was on reincarnation, starting with the scientific evidence for reincarnation, which we'll be touching on today, and it's been seminal in my thinking. And I just believe that reincarnation is one of those concepts that is like plate tectonics. If you at first it's hard to see because it's not obvious, but once you see it, it changes everything. It changes so much, it opens up the horizon of existence. So we thought this would be a good topic to have a shared conversation about. And I'm just a real pleased to be here. Great.

Richard Rudd  3:16  
Thanks, Chris. And I mean, we'll put the link in afterwards, but there's some great things talks that you've done, and particularly one which I watched fairly recently about is there evidence for reincarnation, and it's so illuminating and extraordinary and kind of overlooked by so many people. Tell us some of the you know your story, in assembling and amassing that some of that evidence or meeting the other people that have,

Chris Bache  3:49  
well, you know, I came from a traditional religious background, but over the course of many years of graduate education, I finished My doctoral work in philosophy of religion as an atheistically inclined agnostic. And basically I had studied my way out of religion altogether. So I started my academic career as a young man a long time ago, in 1978 and I met there the work of two people in my first year, and both of them changed the course of my life. The first was Ian Stevenson, the Carlson professor at the University of Virginia, whose lifelong work has been to provide carefully documented cases that clearly of young children, small children, who have spontaneous memories of their previous life, and then researching these children from all over the world, collecting 1000s of cases, publishing hundreds of cases, and he convinced me that reincarnation was a simple fact of life.

Richard Rudd  4:49  
Well, that's quite a book, isn't it? That's a big book he's written.

Chris Bache  4:53  
The book he's written about, oh, I think close to a dozen now, but this first one was called 20 cases suggestive of reincarnation. Reincarnation, and to me, it was a life pivot, because reincarnation was never discussed in my graduate education. It was never discussed in the Western religions or in the scientific tradition that had kind of wiped the slate clean for of the religious traditions. So I just erased my Blackboard and began to rethink again, the larger questions of life, incorporating reincarnation. The second person I met at that time was Stanislav Grof, who is the foremost authority on integrating psychedelics into psychotherapy, and he was providing a methodology that actually allows one to explore the deeper dimensions of one's own consciousness. So that began a whole nother journey, a second journey, which culminated eventually in the publication of this book. Richard mentioned LSD in the mind of the universe. But today, the focus here is on Ian Stevenson's what he started in the revolution of really providing carefully documented evidence that reincarnation is just simply a fact of life. It's not a religious thing. It's not it's simply a natural phenomenon that's happening in the world.

Richard Rudd  6:15  
And in your talk you gave again, which will the link will be? Here it was, is you know, you as a wonderful you know, years spent as an academic, you kind of argue both sides, so you show how you know different people have come in and and even written books to refute those things, but how they've fallen short. And so there's this, there's this whole story around it. And there's this, this growing body of evidence that maybe in the last 50 years has been documented as I mean, it's fairly recent, isn't it?

Chris Bache  6:48  
It is recent. 50 years ago, we didn't have this evidence. It was still reincarnation. Was a speculative topic that the theologians argued back and forth on. But now it's moved from the theologians table to the psychologist table. And now, as we explore more deeply the deeper levels of consciousness in the depth psychology tradition, we just find we're bumping into this evidence over and over again. Now the Western philosophical tradition, of course, is kind of still saturated with the metaphysical position of naturalism, which says, The only thing which is real is that which is physical. So therefore the brain produces your mind. So obviously, in that system, once your brain dies, your mind, this ceases to exist. So it's impossible for there to be something like reincarnation, because it implies a dimension of reality that's behind the physical world, if you exist there for any if consciousness can exist there for any interval of time between the death of one personality and the birth of a second personality. So naturally, there's been a real pushback from philosophical traditions in the West, mostly, they've just ignored the evidence. They don't look at it, and even those who look at it and engage it, the foremost critic that I mentioned in my talk was a man named Paul Edwards, a substantial American philosopher, even in his work, the evidence really a careful, dispassionate analysis of the debate between Ian Stevenson on the one hand and Paul Edwards on the other hand is that he just refuses to look seriously at the evidence because he's convinced beforehand that the evidence must be somehow faulty, because We know that reincarnation can't happen,

Richard Rudd  8:40  
of course, and that's often the way with academics sometimes, isn't it? Yeah, and what you know, a great you know? So that's like, that's really interesting in itself, just the evidence. And I don't think we need to kind of go any more into that now, but it's like, what are, I guess, you know that. What are the implications? You know, if we do, because I this year, I've done a series of videos myself, short ones, just exploring the implications of, what if I say yes to this concept and I explore it in, you know, if I open my mind and my heart to it, and I begin to really deeply explore it? You know that the the the implications, to our worldview and the way we move through life is huge, isn't it?

Chris Bache  9:30  
Yeah, it all hinges on time, how much time we have, because, if you have a sense of, Well, let me back up. I'm a professor, right? So if I give a quiz in class, I can expect a certain quality of an answer back. If I give an exam that takes an hour, I expect a higher quality of response. And if it's a take home research paper, I have higher expectations still, because they have more time. So for. Philosophically, if we believe we only live on earth one time, and we only have, in some cases, a few minutes to as many as 100 years, and we extrapolate from that if there is a purpose to existence, that purpose must be proportionate to the amount of time we have to fulfill that purpose. But if we have 100 lifetimes, 1000 lifetimes in which to actualize the purpose of the universe, then I think it expands exponentially our potential assessment of what the purpose of existence might be. So that's why it's such an important philosophical discussion, because once you understand the dynamics of reincarnation, once you grasp the fundamental principle, then it lifts the constriction of time, and it allows us to begin to think in terms of and appreciate and understand the larger patterns of the pulse of cause and effect, over arching over centuries of time, and it just elevates the whole discussion

Richard Rudd  11:05  
Absolutely. And I think, like, you know, if I can be blunt, like if you if you have an inherent sense of a divinity behind creation, then it seems logical to extend that into, if you know that this concept of generosity, because, if you had a divinity and you only have one life, it's very stingy. It seems like it doesn't seem to have any kind of pattern or reason to it. You know, it's like I, for me, life is is just, you know, spirit is just filled with generosity and in terms of time and and if we, and if we kind of open to the eternal nature of life, then of then, of course, that would make sense, you know, for there to be a continuity of consciousness. And I think that, you know, the more people open to this, the more they kind of realize it has some deep root inside them, you know. And I've, I've, you know, I discovered that a lot because I've begun to talk about it more and more. And one of the things I realized is no one else is really much other than people who doing past life regression. Therapeutically, a lot of the teachers and spiritual teachers in the world today avoid this subject. They, I mean, I don't know if they consciously avoid it, but they don't talk about it. I mean, they get asked questions, but then their answers are kind of generally quite short, and it doesn't get picked up. And so, yeah, I'm, I'm really interested in something that is passed over, that is so in, so obvious, and it's, it should be in plain view for all of us. Yeah, yeah. So, yeah,

Chris Bache  12:55  
isn't that curious? I mean, I understand why my colleagues at the University, who tend to be, you know, materialist and reductionist, why I understand, but why spiritual teachers wouldn't talk about about it, or wouldn't use it to sort of frame a larger and expanded horizon. You know, sometimes I've heard people say, well, it can dilute your intensity of commitments for realization in the present. But you know, if you think you have many lifetimes and you're not going to take this lifetime as seriously, but I think that that argument kind of evaporates quickly once you look at it carefully, yeah, I think it deepens the textures of the situations which we find ourselves in. Let me just give you one example, some of the research of Michael Newton's research, for example, in his book journeys of the soul and destiny of Souls, He and other past life therapists have found evidence that we choose our incarnation. Now, I think in some ways, many people don't. They may kind of go very haphazardly and take what's available. But as you get mature, you choose your incarnation carefully. Now, if we choose our care information, our incarnation carefully, when there was a time when we knew more than we know now and we could see more than we could see now, if we chose the life that we're living now, with all of its ups and downs and challenges and opportunities, then doesn't that change how we might relate to those very circumstances in which we find ourselves, you know, not to go chasing all sorts of hidden mission, You know, hidden meanings, but to basically temper the quality of how of the self responsibility that we use in how we engage the people that we're with, the circumstances that we find ourselves in.

Richard Rudd  14:53  
Yeah, and doesn't it make you also I mean, for me, it makes me feel more. Like a kind of eternal, cosmic adventurer. So I, you know, it enriches this time I'm in now, it actually in where, in many ways, it focuses me a lot more into the present, because I'm not worrying about dying, if you know what I mean, it changes that. And it's not just a concept, you know, you have to go, you know, this is my understanding through my teachings, is you have to contemplate something very deeply like this for it to start to kind of take root in you, and then as it takes root in you, it brings out of your literally, I feel it's the truth of it is in our DNA. It's like it's, it's in us. So once that gets triggered, that kind of awakening of the memory, it there's a sort of certainty and a stability that grows inside us that enables us to handle whatever challenges come to us in a really, much more powerful way, because we're rooted in this kind of eternal acceptance of this, you know, this is because you hear, I you hear it all the time on people on the radio, is I heard last week, like someone just saying, Well, yeah, you've only got one life, so you've got to, you know, really make the most of it, which is a great thing to say, but it's also you only got one life. It's just, I keep coming back to the it's that's really a tight kind of reality from which ever belief system you're operating out of, yeah, cuts the

Chris Bache  16:34  
legs right out from under you. Yeah? Because it just because of correlating with that is the usually, the ideas of your exist in the universe is being driven by blind chance. It's just random mutation. There's no existential significance to the circumstances in which you find yourself in. So you only get one shot make the best of it. But then when you die, it's gone. You're gone anyway, so who cares? And that's just such a demeaning and counter intuitive philosophy of life. Because I think when we look at the beauties of nature, when we look at the night sky, when we see the pictures from the Hubble telescope of the magnificent patterns in the deep cosmos. When we look around us at Earth and look at the depth of the emergence of life and the emergence of self awareness on the planet over time, all these projects take place over enormous sweeps of time, and we, we are the first generation to really appreciate how much time the universe has had to be evolving into the form that it is now. If the universe and everything it's doing takes enormous amounts of time and we only have one life, then existentially, we're cut off. We're not we don't participate in that, in that massive project. But if we do purchase, if we live multiple lifetimes, there's a good news bad news situation. You know, the bad news is, you know, well, it's hard work in this lifetime, and we'd like to have it over with when we die, but if we keep coming back, you know, there's a larger project afoot. You know, it's not a simple grade like we thought it was before. It's a whole university education. The good news is, you're right, it drops away. The fear of death drops away. I mean, it just drops away. The good news is, it allows us to envision a deeper, to feel, into the deeper currents of life and the deeper projects, and it allows us begin to think in terms of longer term projects. And I think this is one of the things you see when people take to heart this idea, even without specific knowledge of their former lives. I mean, that's interesting, and that can be helpful. But even without that, when you really let that in, and you look around you and you realize that every person you're seeing has been here before and will be here again. It just allows you to engage life with so much more meaning and intensity of the process that you know, what we are good at are things we have practice in the past, things that we are just getting started on, are things we'll get better at in the future. And we can think we have that much time, we can think in terms of that larger landscape.

Richard Rudd  19:35  
Yeah, and of course, you know, we're not, you know, there are many there. There are many great thinkers and philosophers and sages who have come to the same conclusion about rebirth, and, you know, notably among them in the western because of, you know, we can talk a little bit about the Eastern views in the east, yeah. But Jung is someone who obviously. Springs like straight up into this, into the center frame, because he's a bit more contemporary. And, you know, he's been this pillar of modern psychology in the way in which we now understand the unconscious and and, yeah, and the collective unconscious, and mythology and all these other transformational kind of consciousness tended to

Chris Bache  20:22  
hide his belief in reincarnation, you know, he came to it kind of late in life, and he began to hide it because he had pushed the boundaries so much he was concerned about the backlash. But there in his work, and I

Richard Rudd  20:36  
think that's what happens with a lot of people, I think they go, Well, I'm not sure I want to go into that area because it's, it's got a stigma attached to it, yeah, and it really has, isn't it? Because the moment you say the word reincarnation, you've got, like, there's a whole kind of battery of of skeptics coming at you, whether they're coming from Christianity or whether they're coming from, you know, materialist science. You know, it's like you're really put your head above the parapet,

Chris Bache  21:05  
yeah, you know, for years, for decades, I was taking students into the literature on reincarnation, and it's like you just once, you put all that aside, and you just look at the cases. You just look at the evidence. I mean, I found 95% of my students were able to overcome all kinds of resistances, both secular and religious resistances, because they're trained in our culture to follow the evidence once they saw the evidence and how consistent it was and how it appeared in so many contexts, spontaneous memories evoked memories. They just they accepted it. Once they accepted it, it was a it was a life changing event. And many of their

Richard Rudd  21:50  
lives, every favorite stories that you remember, of those, those recurrences, because it's

Chris Bache  21:57  
not I have so many. And the one I opened the store, the book with life cycles, the one I started in the opening pages, is a case of a young girl named Romy Creese. And Romi was born to Catholic parents in Iowa. So it's like, it's okay if they want to reincarnate in India. That's their business. But everybody knows Ian Catholics do not reincarnate. But she had spontaneous memories of having been a man, Joe Williams in a previous life. She remembers being married. She remembers three children, having three children and their names. She remembered dying in a motorcycle accident, and she had a phobia of motorcycles and long story short, the researchers got to her eventually, and brought her to the town where she had remembered living as Joe Williams, and she was able to remember identify the mother of Joe Williams, she insisted that they Pick up blue flowers on the way to the house, because she said those are the flowers that she likes. And that turned out to be true. She was able to identify from pictures who the people were in Joe Williams life, the players of their life. And she developed this deep emotional bond to Joe Williams, mother, who was alive, and his wife named Sheila. He had been married. She had been married to Joe. Had been married to Sheila. They were did have three children. Sheila and Joe were killed in a motorcycle accident. So this is goes on and on and on.

Richard Rudd  23:39  
Hundreds of these days, there's so many of them. Yeah, so

Chris Bache  23:42  
many these children remember very intimate details of family history. They remember the they know the architecture inside homes that they've never been in. They can walk around a town that they've never been in, and they know their way around. They remember the personalities from the previous person, person's life, and they remember arguments that they had had with neighbors, incidents that came up in like the time a child and they're when they were having a birthday party for their child that a neighbor's dog bit one of the children in the party. I mean, very, very things that are just don't make the public news and just

Richard Rudd  24:24  
no little details. It's the little details, isn't it? There's one I've read I loved. I can't remember exactly, but I remember a reincarnated memory of in a Muslim family and and they took the little girl, or think it was a little girl into the family, and the women were there, veiled, completely veiled. And she identified from from looking at them, from seeing their body language, without seeing their faces, at anything she could name them and and that was like, wow. That's how deep this kind of detail goes. Yeah, yeah, it's, it's fun to explore those things. And I, you know, I recommend to people that you just take a look at some of the evidence, because it's very, I find it very affirming, you know, sort of like it's difficult to refute that level of detail. And I don't know you can come up with, I'm sure good cynic can come up with all kinds of Well,

Chris Bache  25:24  
here's one for the cynics. This. This is one of Ian Stevenson's cases. They brought this boy back into the life circumstances of the previous personality, and the wife of the previous personality said, Okay, if you're my husband, where did you put the will? We after you died, we looked all over for the will. We couldn't find it. Yeah, the little boy walks over to a floorboard in the kitchen, picks up a board, reaches down and underneath the floor and pulls up the will. Wow, isn't that something? Yeah, it's how many of those cases do you read before you begin to understand this is just happening. It's just part of the rhythm of life.

Richard Rudd  26:06  
Totally, it is extraordinary. And also it has, you know, there's, there's a whole load of documentation about marks on the body, isn't there? You know, marks on the body that relate to previous events or, you know, I don't think we need to go down that route, but it's, it's, it's another whole area of documentation that

Chris Bache  26:28  
was Steve Ian Stevenson, his last work. And if you do want to go down that area, you can read his two volume, 1000 page book on reincarnation and biology, which he studies, 187 cases with medical documentation, really rigorous, rigorous, very, very rigorous. And what we find is that the death wounds, wounds associated with death in the previous personality show up as birthmarks are scars in the subsequent personality. So this is suggesting, not only do our does our mind influence subsequent mind, but even our body, our mind's experience in the body can influence the formation of tissue in our subsequent body. And that, of course, just deepens the story

Richard Rudd  27:21  
Absolutely. And that's why I wanted to bring it up, because that's what leads into the therapeutic work, doesn't it? Because if you open to this idea, then, I mean, I'm just thinking of all the people out there who have difficulties, maybe in their health or maybe in their relationships, or maybe addictions, or, you know, whatever we're facing in life, or just things that you know that they they've complexes that they find really hard to overcome, yeah, and if we understand that those things may have a root in a previous lifetime, and that that was something unfinished or incomplete, then It can open up a whole therapeutic journey for us. And that's what this this whole therapeutic community has has evolved out of this

Chris Bache  28:08  
past life therapy community. Basically, there are any number of therapists who've said something to the effect of this, if you put someone into a relaxed, inward, focused state, a hypnotic state, but people have a lot of misunderstandings of what hypnosis, but it just relax inward focused state, and you invite them to go to the source of the problem that you're they've come to therapy to address about 35 40% of them will go back to something in their present life. It'll come back to something that happened in their childhood or something in their in their infancy, but a significant 50, 60% of people will go back to something that's rooted in a previous lifetime, and when they consciously remember that previous lifetime, and they consciously reappropriate the trauma that they weren't able to fully internalize and address in that lifetime, particularly death, circumstances surrounding their death, when they are able to consciously remember and assimilate it into their present consciousness, then consistently over and over again, underlying psychological problems and even physical problems begin to loosen their grip on us and untie the knots. So because

Richard Rudd  29:31  
a greater depth, because they have these roots deep in the collective unconscious, you know, and we're going into the collective unconscious to find them and pull them out. Or, you know, that's

Chris Bache  29:43  
well, let's be a little careful here, because collective unconscious, in a Jungian kind of usage, refers to the unconscious of the entire species. But so let's maybe call a soul consciousness, which is the collective unconscious of the individual. You all through time,

Richard Rudd  30:02  
I got a good, a good question for you, which is, I have a really dear friend, and he is a a kind of startling intellect. He's in his late 70s now, and really, really intelligent, very spiritual man, and yet he has a difficulty with reincarnation, and we have wonderful discussions around it in the past. And his kind of his very sophisticated spiritual intellect, you know, where it goes is in and I think others may come from this direction as well. That's why I'm saying it is that you know you really want, you know you want to believe it. Everyone wants to believe in the continuity of our existence. And yet you know the, you know, the the great Advaita teachers, or whatever, that you know that they would talk about the surrender of the individual ego, into the higher, you know, into the back, into the ocean of being, and that that's something that you have to undergo in order to attain liberation. And so there is this, there is this very strong spiritual kind of, I think we, you know, we've referred to it as up and out kind of cosmology where you know that we are here to escape this, this cycle, the samsaric cycle, and that, you know, so that we can attain this liberation. And we may attain it within this lifetime, in a body, or we may attain it, you know, afterwards. So that's another whole kind of interesting area, isn't it?

Chris Bache  31:49  
Yeah, simply because there are cultures who have believed in reincarnation for 1000s of years and have developed a certain understanding of it in their culture doesn't mean that they've got it right. And I think that reincarnation is one of those ideas that simply, once we begin to see the evidence, then it begins to deepen a line of inquiry, which, for me, personally, I think, is I've revised dramatically the understanding I had of reincarnation borrowed from Eastern traditions, Eastern cultures. And one of the traditions has to do with this larger question, Where does reincarnation go? Where is it taking us? What is the what's the end game of reincarnation? And you're right, all the cultures, all the religions of the Axial Age, it came into existence three to 5000 years ago, all of them teach a cosmological journey, that's an up and out cosmology. So there is a sense that we're trapped here. This is not as good as spiritual reality. We want to develop, either in one lifetime, if it's a Christian salvation, salvation by grace, you know, or multiple lifetimes to achieve Samsara, excuse me, achieve moksha, which is escape from Samsara, escape from the physical world. We achieve some type of enlightenment condition, which is the passport that allows us to leave and not come back. And all of these traditions are up are basically about escape. And that leaves unanswered the fundamental question, what is the purpose of physical existence in the first place? And now that we have a deeper understanding of how many billions of years of genius have gone into the manifestation of the physical world, it's not a very satisfactory conclusion to think that just within we only became conscious of this deeper dimensions about 5000 years ago, as soon as we become self conscious of the level of consciousness, which we share with all other beings and all existence, as soon as we become aware of That and can live our life from that center, then the purpose of existence is to escape the entire physical world. And I don't think that's really

Richard Rudd  34:09  
true, and it's rooted in that kind of slightly self denial philosophy, isn't it? That you know that also is many 1000s of years

Chris Bache  34:22  
old. Yeah, I think they're basically all the axial religions got two things fundamentally wrong. They got many things right, but they got two things wrong. They got nature wrong. They don't really have an adequate theology or understanding of nature, and they got women wrong. And the two are connected, because women are so closely connected to nature, and they're patriarchally oriented, and they're escapist oriented. And I think it makes as an historian, I understand it. I think about four or 5000 years ago, through various psycho. Technologies, either yoga or meditation or psychedelic substances, we began to have a deeper experience of the mother universe, of this universe that surrounds the physical universe. Once you have experiential contact with that universe, it is so blissful, it is so ecstatic, soaked that you cannot help, and you recognize that that's where we're from, you cannot help believe that that's where we belong. This is not where we belong, that's where we belong. Yeah, and they develop a theology of return. So they're the Savior comes to take us home, the enlightened being comes to liberate us back into our home. But that still leaves the question, what is the purpose of creation? And I think what we're beginning to understand now, as our experience of this mother universe is deepened over time, and our understanding of the physical universe has deepened over time, is that we're not here to achieve escape velocity and leave we're here to incarnate more and more and more of spiritual reality and capacity inside our physical being, so that we can truly live and create heaven on earth, to wake up and stay Yeah. I mean, not just to wake up as an individual, but to wake up as an entire species and stay,

Richard Rudd  36:20  
yeah, now that you can't leave that. I mean, we're going to discuss that more, aren't we? We're going to come back to that. But that's a huge that's a huge window to open up. It's this, you know, and you've touched on a lot of themes there, particularly, you know, the thing about the feminine that you know, the the the physical, the physical body, you know, like, that's what I think I interpret, partly what you're saying as well, is that those religions didn't really understand the physical body, as you said, nature didn't value because there's, you know, there's vast beauty in this physicality, and it's, you know, perhaps what we're exploring is, perhaps it's here to be spiritualized. Perhaps it's here to it's you know. Perhaps that's why we're here to bring that ecstatic realization deeper and deeper and deeper into the form, because then we're, you know, if we see that that's our highest purpose, we no longer want to leave you know, because that's then our role is, through subsequent incarnations, to bring more and more of that light down into the earth, into you know, to you know. And then we're also taking full responsibility for the body and the earth, you know, which is something we also haven't done very well. Yeah, yeah, absolutely.

Chris Bache  37:46  
And if that sounds at first disappointing, where we would say, Oh no, I want heaven, please. Thank you very much. I don't want a transformed body here, because here is still too difficult. I think we may be underestimating how what we may be underestimating what is possible and just what it would really feel like to live a truly, fully spiritualized, enlightened existence. And here, I think we can look at some of the god soaked masters of history who are truly living in the god soaked condition, or the, you know, a primordial condition that is radically open to the vast mind of the universe, inside their body, inside time and space. And what we're seeing from these mahasiddhas, these great beings, is that they can do what we would call miracles, because there is so much spiritual power concentrated in their presence that it is as if the laws of nature operate differently around them, and they're showing us a prototype of what each of us is in the process of becoming, yeah, no. And therefore, if we imagine what it would be like to have an entire species kind of living in that kind of presence, and what

Richard Rudd  39:15  
and our physics is is also pushing us in that direction, isn't it, to the understandings that we're entangled with nature, with the universe, and that you know that, and my whole teaching is based on this notion that in our in our DNA, are contained these, these sleeping, dormant codes, these cities, these, as I call them, 64 cities. And like you're talking about that they are they're an activation inside us that's that is waiting for its moment so that we can enter more fully into the next phase of our evolution, the magical universe, the quantum universe, you know, where our thoughts and our feelings and our sensations are. Are actually traveling kind of outside our physical body. You know, they're entangled with nature. So nature then responds with us to us, which perhaps it already does, at a level that we're not aware of. So it's just about opening up those pathways. You know, there's literal pathways in our being, into that, into that next phase of our evolution.

Chris Bache  40:27  
We are already plugged into nature at very, very deep levels, down to the quantum level, in the unified field, we're plugged into our ecosystems and these subtle, intimate feedbacks, and we're plugged into each other. Our minds wash back and forth, we're already there. But when we can become conscious of those connections, when we can sort of lift off the obstructive shadows that are carry overs from other sadder times, then that connection becomes, begins to rise, and it empowers a conscious participation, and it makes what was unconscious conscious, and then existence becomes more enlivened, I think, and enlightened with the synchronicities that sort of indicate the broader intelligence that's, You know, that's alive in life around us?

Richard Rudd  41:21  
Yeah, yeah, I and I'm sure that, you know, I'd love it if we could bring our conversation also into, sort of into people's lives, a little bit, so that they can consider their relationships and, you know, from this perspective, and how that might change one's attitudes or views towards difficult relationships or towards, you know, what? You know, what's the afflictions that come up in us and that we have to handle in our everyday life? It really changes all of that, doesn't it? Because, you know, then you look at life, and it's actually a process of the opening of the heart, you know, which the teachers have always said it's like every relationship, its purpose is to show us some grace. And I call this this law of unseen grace. You know, where every relationship that shows up is offering us some, you know, particularly the difficult ones, is offering us some incredible teaching, some, some virtue that we haven't yet polished. You know, whether it's forgiveness or whether it's you know, some you know, clarity, or whether it's you know, whatever it is, it's just, it's, it's some form of love that we are here to learn from those relationships, because they have. They come as part of our teaching karma, you know. So I always see like that, you know, the ancients called it this life a Leela. And I always see these a game, a drama theater. And it's almost like, before you come in, you're given this little envelope, and in there you open up the envelope, and in there is like, Okay, here's your script here, and here are the, you know, and there's going to be some things that show up. And these are the things you're going to learn this, you know, you've chosen it at some level. And so that changes the way that we kind of see behave, doesn't it? Yeah, I think statics, I'm sure, like, if you had personal experience of that in your in your life, in your emotional life, I mean, that's

Chris Bache  43:30  
Yeah, and it one little one more step. It's not simply the envelope that was given you, but you were given three envelopes, and you chose the one that you felt was most suited for your evolution at this particular point in history. And so it's your choice to engage these challenges. And yeah, and when we engage our life in that way, as taking full responsibility for the circumstances in which we find ourselves. In it. It allows us to engage the challenges with more patience and with more dedication and with more of the long term, because we know we're not if this is something that, if we don't deal with it now, it's not going to go away, it's just going to come back in another form. So let's get it done now. Let's let's deal with it now. And it also allows you to build on things. Because I think our understanding of reincarnation is being very informed by the therapist working heroically in past life therapy. But if you only pay attention to those cases, it can tend to create an understanding of reincarnation that is tilted towards failures, coming forward, that we traumas, traumas, yeah, but it, but just like the school system around us has many faults, but most of the kids learn and most of the kids pass. Every year. And I think most people rise to the karma, the challenge of their of their life. And that means every lifetime, we're not simply dealing with leftover issues from the past. We're building on assets. We're spending assets and investing in greater fruition in the future. And so it's it helps us handle the challenging circumstances, but it also helps us embrace the positive circumstances of our life, the hidden talent which comes forward unannounced, the partnership which emerges that we can we feel such a deep kinship with this person that we can go forward and do something new with Yeah,

Richard Rudd  45:44  
and I, you kind of triggered a memory of mine about from Sri Aurobindo, you know, who spoke incredibly Clearly, you know, with his penetrating mind about the complexity of karma and how we, you know, because we need to sort of probably discuss karma a little bit and how it, you know, we misunderstand it so easily by by trying to oversimplify it. And actually, you know, when you look at the universe with all its multiple dimensions, and, you know, the quantum field. And there's this, there's this, these force fields operating at different levels, but there's this karmic force that's that's equalizing and balancing, you know, or that has a tendency towards balance, we could say, and is in allowing us to go through this educational process. But everything at different levels is is influenced by these, these strands of the karmic force. And that karmic force seems to have, it's like this, the idea I said about unseen grace. If you are able to fully embrace it in your life. Then you get the grace through going through through unwrapping it and but you've got to kind of have the courage to face it fully and really take it in and let it in. You know, whatever the suffering is, transform it, transmute it so it doesn't. Transmutation of karma play a huge part in this reincarnative theology.

Chris Bache  47:28  
If we just look around us, it's the web of cause and effect. Everything is cause and effect. We live in a continuous web of cause and effect, the air we breathe, the weather patterns, our biology, what we ate, the purity of what we ate everything is this flow of cause and effect the universe, the movement of the planets, the solar system. We live in a continuous web of cause and effect, and here we're simply focusing on that portion of the web of cause and effect which influences the human the development of the soul influences our human psychophysical development, which is a subset with the of this much larger cause and effect. And in that context, I think we've had a tendency, I think, to narrow our discussion of karma. Usually, many of the teachers will talk about karma, and they're only talking about that portion of the karma which immediately impinges upon our spiritual maturity, whether we're making progress becoming a more spiritually mature person. But a lot of karma, probably the bulk of karma, is just a moral cause and effect. You have a habit. You practice something, it becomes a skill. That skill carries over into another life. You have an automobile accident, you develop a trauma of a particular circumstance that carries over into another life. It's not necessarily about your spiritual development, it's just cause and effect, circumstantial. Yeah, and so when, as you open up to the conditioning that's kind of etching itself in your life, and you lift it out, you engage it. Lift it out, then that the wellspring of your life becomes freer. It becomes clear. And you're, you're not ex you're not stepping out of the web of cause and effect, but you're you're stepping into a greater freedom within the web work of cause and effect that surrounds you. You have greater capacity to make increasingly free choices, greater capacity to choose. Ask yourself, well, what do I want? What would I like have, instead of a compulsion of, you know, grabbing, you

Richard Rudd  49:46  
know, you know, it's tempting, isn't it, for some people to kind of say, well, karma and reincarnation, you know. And then there's this story of like, well, that person over there was born disabled. Does that mean they've done something terrible in their last life? And and there's that whole. Be a sort of oversimplification over very complex kind of arena where you know we don't, unless you can plug right into the soul quality inside that person, inside that being you don't really know, you know what you know they could be that hidden saint that has deliberately taken on that incredibly challenging role to polish one particular virtue you know or skill you know, like over, over the period of one lifetime, and equally, I guess, like very short incarnations that I don't think you and I talked about those, But I'd love to hear what you, you know, like a child that comes in for a very short time and then leaves, that also has implications for the healing of the whole doesn't it? Because Why does a child come in for a short time, or a baby is born very, you know, for a very short period of time, and then there's leaves, this grief behind it, but then there's this feeling that it's also still part of your life, yeah, yes, explore that. I mean, we haven't. We can go and talk about that, yeah, yeah.

Chris Bache  51:10  
You know, it's you. We can recognize the principle of cause and effect. We can recognize the principle of karma, vipaka, cause and effect. But then we can get so many teachers, I think sometimes get or all of us. We think we can determine cause and effect. We think we can understand it when really, we're just touching the wrapping, on the park, on the package, we're just really touching the surface. And the safest position, I think, really, is recognize that we're looking at a deep, deep mystery here, and you're it would be foolish to try to judge anybody's karma that's just that's a wasted exercise. Better to stick with the karma that you can penetrate within your own life. And you're right, because we don't know, we really don't know what's happening when we see cause and effect operating around us. When you I would tell my students, when you see great suffering, you're see they're seeing a sinner or a saint, and you can never know which it is so best not to make any judgments at all. And I think there are many hidden saints, many more hidden saints, who are taking on a lot of cause and effect, either from their own larger soul stream or from even a collective soul stream. So they're actually focusing in their body, in their in their psyche, what we might call negative karma, negative cause and effect for the uplift of the whole and that type of generosity and compassion we see it around us all the time. And good parents and good mothers and good fathers, they would be do anything for their children. And I think souls at that deeper level do that too. So, yeah, we can't judge. We really just couldn't judge. It's a waste of effort.

Richard Rudd  53:09  
No, I read this book. I think I told you about this book. It was and anyone, it's a recommendation called sand talk, and it's by an Aboriginal from Australia or part Aboriginal and really intelligent man. And he tells a story of when he went to to talk to one of the elders about, you know, the problems of the, you know, the indigenous people, particularly the men who had kind of just got gone down the role of alcoholic, the way of alcoholism, and we're eating really terrible food, and, like, we're overweight and obese, and these terrible problems that he's and he was, like, really concerned about. And the the old elder just said, yeah, they're the Warriors, you know, they are taking on the karmic you know, they are warrior spirits in our tribe, in our lineage, and they're holding this kind of negativity in their bodies. And you know, one day they will become, they will move from warrior to healer, and that's the path, that's the kind of evolutionary pathway, yeah. But it was a beautiful it really, like, it really stuck with this young man as he was exploring, like, wow, that's a really, kind of powerful, empowering way to see someone dealing with, like, a cultural problem, you know, or, you know, a societal, you know, difficulty that's more collective, you Know, that we see a lot. Yeah, you know, collective Karma is a, you know, we're touching on here as well.

Chris Bache  54:46  
Yeah, it's a very, very deep, those deep currents that run underneath that requires us to open to a much deeper, expanded spiritual story. And because we often think of Rhee. Incarnation and karma in a very individualistic, atomistic fashion, where we're, you know, the individual soul is involving themselves over the skillful use of choice in in the context of karma. And if we start to sink into a larger understanding, a deeper understanding, then we recognize that each individual is a fractal point within a unified field, and that there's a these deep currents that are running within the the unconscious of humanity or the soul field of humanity, and that we are all players on a larger evolutionary dynamic, then it just opens up a deeper understanding of what's taking place here. And I know that we've sort of tagged this for one of our topics for our second discussion, but it's, yeah,

Richard Rudd  55:57  
well, we plant the seed now it perfect. You know, when you go into that kind of worldview, the perfection of the choreography of what you're explaining is just mind blowing, isn't it? It's mind blowing in terms of the interconnectivity of soul groups and these fractals and these patternings of humans and, you know, and this is why, one of the great insights that I got from your your unit mind of the universe book, because you described this really well. It's a paradox, I think, and maybe it's one of the last things we can just discuss to hear today, because it's so important, I find, and it's the paradox of being an individual soul and yet being everything at the same time. Yeah, you know, so how does that paradox? How do we? How does that hold up? You described it beautifully in your book, as I think you said the soul or the or the you know that the soul was open, open on all sides. I think that was the expression used, which I really liked, open on all sides, yeah, and it's so like part of the the ocean, and yet still a focal, focalized drop, yeah, I'm under awareness. Also, you have named it,

Chris Bache  57:20  
yeah, it seems, it seems common sensical that you can't be both a part and the whole at the same time. Those are mutual exclusive categories. And even, you know, great spiritual teachers, the Vedanta tradition in Hinduism and other spiritual systems, have said the goal of life is to abandon your individuality, dissolve that, and allow yourself to be absorbed into the totality and to know the bliss of absorption. So that means all the individual capacity which we are developing over all these incarnations, in this view, ends in extinction. And it's kind of wasted. Yeah, I think it's wasted, and I think that's it's an inadequate worldview. And what has emerged in in my spiritual path and in my psychedelic path is a very different kind of worldview that I think we share, and that is that that we are moving into higher and higher, more sophisticated forms of individuality, that individuality is one of the great gifts of creation. It's something the divine wants to encourage in its creation and but at early stages of individuality, we experience our individuality cut off from the larger texture of surrounds. So it's us against them or us in the whole but when individuality matures into a richer expression, into what I would call the birth of the diamond soul, then there is both a sense of being a specific, defined individuality emerging out of the specific Historical lineage, and yet at the same time, profoundly open to the larger patterns of existence, open to each other and compassionate heart, open to other human beings with whom we have such deep histories with, and open to, in a sense, the the intelligence of the universe, Open to the the perceptions and the influence of ideas that flow into us and this communion with the universe, which and I actually believe that you have to have developed a very, very strong individuality to withstand the intensity of the communion that's available to us when we enter into communion with the one, with the whole it is, is if, if we didn't, if we weren't really, really diamond, hard and focused and clear when we encountered the love of the universe for us, it would just shatter us. You know, we. Have to be strong in order to actually participate in the deeper levels of communion. Yeah.

Richard Rudd  1:00:06  
And I think, you know, that that's such an empowering vision. It's so empowering that's and it's also, you know, I think it opens this, this question of, like, our notion of enlightenment, our notion of divinity, we have to kind of go on expanding that, because it's just a notion that we've inherited, you know, and they and it's and even though, you know, it's been useful to get us to where we are, we have to just go on expanding. And for me, what is kind of missing more in the current, you know modalities is creativity, you know, like that. You know, that whole idea of it coming to an end and then going out into the you know, into the into the wonderful absorption of the whole you know, by maintaining the individuality at the same time, what you are maintaining is creativity, creativity itself, because then you're like a shard of the Divine creative essence. And it's like you say in your book, go out and create my children, you know. And if there, if there were a divinity, let's say like, and it, you know, and it wanted to have children, then the thing it would want for its children is to be free, right? And to go out and create and to become Gods within God. That's, that's, that's the vision I hold that, you know, we, we become creator gods within the wider, Yes, God, you know, lovely in a big G

Chris Bache  1:01:42  
God within god, yes, yeah, the creative spark within the fire of creation, yes, yes. I agree with that. I share that. And it changes everything. It changes how we greet the children who were born into our families, because we know that they're not coming from us, they're coming to us. It changes how we see old people and how we see little people, because young people are not necessarily young in terms of their soul age. Old people are not necessarily old in terms of their soul age. It just opens up a much larger tapestry, and it gives us permission to recognize the deep aspirations that we have, towards greatness, towards great creativity, towards the great love, towards great spiritual fulfillment, things that we may or may not finish and get through in this lifetime, but we can, we can move toward them.

Richard Rudd  1:02:40  
It's a much more in some respect, sophisticated spirituality, isn't it? It's more nuanced. It requires a subtler kind of understanding, intellectual, I wouldn't say intellectually, but through a subtler intelligence to understand it. It's not this sort of, you know, here's the law of karma. It governs everything. You know. Bang, it's not that simple. It's like Aurobindo says, There are layers and layers of understanding and subtlety and nuance. It's like, I'm a lover of tea, you know, fine tea. And you know, when you when you find something like that, and you can be anything, you know. You can be a chess player, and you and you find the subtlest nuances in the in the in the thing you're really understanding the layers and layers and layers as you become more attuned to it. And I think that's what we are. We are becoming more and more attuned. The the more evolved that individual soul essence becomes, then the more the more subtle we can, the more we can understand, you know, these nuances, and then we're kind of, I don't know that we're really, we're really inspired by the empowered as well by the creative current. I mean, maybe we can leave this to the next one, but people always talk about past lives, and I'm my part of my teaching is like, I'm interested in future lives as well. And because when you expand your sense of time broadly enough, you know really, like, really, don't hold back anything. You don't need to just look backwards, you can also remember forwards. And because there's this feeling that memory has to go back, but memory, also, for me, is like it travels forwards, and that's what we call revelation, you know? So, so revelations can come backwards and forwards through time, into this into this essence, and this essence can be hugely expanded by those revelations and and and more focused than ever in the present, you know, in the beauty of the present moment. So, yeah, I think that's the thought I'd like to end on. But does any like? Do you want to like close us off?

Chris Bache  1:04:55  
That's a that's a really good thought and a good spot to end on to me. It's. Yes, the principle of accumulation is one of the fundamental principles I bring to understanding what's happening in creation. That the universe is accumulating. It's learning. It's a self learning system, and so we are constantly learning. We can't help but learn. Even if we do a mediocre job in our lifetime, we're still learning in that lifetime. And if we do a better job, we're learning. And as we learn, we activate, in one sense, I think we are learning to be geniuses in every area of life, a genius at chess, a genius at relationships, a genius in all the different areas of life. And as if each lifetime is a petal in a flower, the soul is the flower and there, if you just, I meditate sometimes on a flower, and imagine each 100 year lifetime, it's a pistol and a stamen and a petal in this magnificent flower. And that's, you know, to be a genius at life, to really to be completely unfolded and taking advantage of the opportunity that we've been given to grow and become more than we've been. And again, so many, even though many cultures have understood reincarnation, I don't think they've grasped it fully. They haven't really seen the the full potential of the concept. They've really seen it within an early limited, limitation of it. And on the future. We're going to talk about time more I know as we go on. But let me just leave with a thought that Robert Monroe, the great out of body researcher and the founder of the Monroe Institute of Applied Sciences. His book far journeys, ultimate journey, he said he reached a point in his explorations out of body where he discovered, he realized that you don't necessarily have to incarnate in the next century. That incarnation isn't necessarily historically linear. You could have former lives that were actually lived in future time. So that isn't that that just like, oh man. I mean, I really unpick that one a little bit. Yeah, that really challenges things. So in addition to intuiting the future, which is not yet, and bringing the not yet into the now. I wonder sometimes whether some of us have sampled that future time and are inculcating the awareness in the now.

Richard Rudd  1:07:37  
So that's what I would call a current, the current of involution, as opposed to evolution. You know, it's like there is a spiritual force coming down, and there is a there is an evolution, evolving force going up, if you want to do it up and down, but, you know, yeah, it's like a funnel.

Chris Bache  1:07:56  
Yeah, Sri Aurobindo, I love you quoting Sri Aurobindo, because he's one of my heroes too. Yeah, he's all that clearly and I agree.

Richard Rudd  1:08:04  
Yeah, great. Well, what a wonderful beginning. Chris, yeah, thank you. Where we go next, yeah, me too, yeah, take care. All right. Take care. Richard, you.

Unknown Speaker  1:08:13  
You.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
