David Lorimer  0:11  
A warm welcome, everybody. I'm tuning in here from the Cathar area of South West France. As many of you will know, my name is David Larimer. I'm the Program Director of the scientific and medical network. So Chris, Chris, I've known Chris for a long time, and he's he taught for 33 years at the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at Youngstown State University, and is also connected with the CIS California Institute of integral studies and Noetic Sciences, and he's an advisor to the Grof legacy training, which I'm also involved in. And he said he writes here that his passion has been the study and the philosophical implications of Non-ordinary states of consciousness, particularly psychedelic states. And I'd like to add a plug, as it were, for his book that isn't on this particular theme, the living classroom, an exploration of collective fields of consciousness and teaching. And this is particularly fascinating in terms of the synchronicities that seem to arise in Chris's teaching with his students, and he may refer to that in passing. So his two books that I've read and reviewed, this is the initial one here, Dark Knight, early door, and I think that's exactly where we are collectively at the moment. And then his book, prize winning book, LSD, in the mind of the universe. And many of you will have read his article in the current issue of paradigm Explorer. So Chris, I'm really looking forward to this presentation. Very warm welcome from us, and we can't wait to hear what you have to say.

Chris Bache  1:57  
Thank you, David, let me shift into screen sharing, if I can do this correctly. Good. Okay. Well, thank you David, and thank you everybody. It's an honor and a pleasure to be here with you tonight, and I really look forward to sharing with you the experiences that I'm reporting in this book, LSD and the mind of the universe. Now David has framed our conversation this evening as a question of whether we can all participate, all access the cosmic mind, I'm assuming, using psychedelics. Well, I believe that we all can, but whether we all should is another matter entirely. In contrast to the early idea that psychedelics represent a shortcut to mystical experience. My concern is that the psychedelic journey into the Cosmic Mind is extremely demanding and must be approached with great care and caution. In LSD, in the mind of the universe, I try to describe as clearly and carefully as I can, experiences that opened in 73 high dose LSD sessions conducted over 20 years when I was a young man between 30 and 50 years old. And this was 1979 to 1999 I spent another 20 years thinking about these experiences, digesting them, mapping them, and pondering their implications. I hope that the visions that I brought back from this journey will be useful, not only to other Psychonauts, but also to those who would never take a psychedelic themselves. Because what's important here is the vision of the cosmos that they contain, and a vision of where humanity is in its long evolutionary journey and the turning point that we're coming to now I want to say up front before we begin that I'm not sure that what I did was wise. I pushed myself very hard on this journey, harder than was sometimes good for me, and I sincerely do not recommend this protocol to others. If I were starting this journey over again, I would be gentler with myself. I would work with lower doses and gentler psychedelics, but I made it through intact, and I would not have missed it for the world. I also want to say that I know that what I'm presenting tonight is a radical story. I know it raises many questions that we won't get to speak about tonight, about the reality of these experiences, about how this path compares to other spiritual paths. But this radical nature is inescapable. I believe that psychedelics represent a genuine turning point in philosophy. A true before and after advance. They give us more than new insights into consciousness and more than a new therapeutic method for healing the wounds of the personal psyche. As important as these things are, the critical use of psychedelics gives us a new philosophical method that has two parts, first, immersing ourselves into temporary states of hyper aroused consciousness, and second, stepping back and critically analyzing our experiences there by moving back and forth between non ordinary and ordinary states of consciousness, we can gather and distill new insights into the structure of reality. Now, of course, this method is not really new, is it? It was present in the Eleusinian Mysteries of ancient Greece and in the Ayahuasca ceremonies of Brazil that date back 1000 years, but they are new to us, new to our scientific culture, and that's the point we are witnessing, I think, the emergence of a true psychedelic philosophy. So let's begin my psychedelic lineage is rooted in the work of Stanislav Grof. I was a brand new faculty member in 1978 when I first read his book, realms of the human unconscious, and my life pivoted that was followed quickly by his book LSD psychotherapy in 1980 in which he laid out the method for working with these substances. Now, Stan has demonstrated that LSD is a non specific amplifier and catalyst of consciousness. It does not give us specific experiences. Rather, it hyper sensitizes one's consciousness for six to eight hours at a time. Everything that follows hinges on how we use these hours. Now. Stan's work clearly differentiates two different therapeutic modalities, psycholytic therapy, low dose therapy and psychedelic therapy, high dose therapy, in psycholytic therapy, the mind is peeled away layer by layer, uncovering the different layers of our shadow and taking us back deeper and deeper into our unconscious. In psychedelic therapy, this is a very different protocol. It was developed and used at Spring Grove Hospital. It was limited to three sessions maximum, and it was designed to trigger a near death type experiences among patients who were terminally ill. Well, I thought if you could use this therapy of hyad Working with high doses safely three times. You could use it working safely more than three times. So during the years I was doing this work, I simply saw myself as doing an extended course of psychedelic therapy. But when I came to the end of this journey and was looking back over its length, I came to appreciate how radical this undertaking had actually been. This went beyond psychedelic therapy as it was originally conceived and practiced, and therefore it called for a new term to avoid confusion, and so I've named it psychedelic exploration. Now I worked at 500 to 600 micrograms. This is a very high dose level. The method is the method of psychedelic therapy, complete isolation and complete protection from the outside world, trusting your care to a sitter, wearing eyes shades and working with very carefully chosen music to pace the opening and closing of your session. The difference is the high number of sessions, in my case, 73 times. Now I think that the stabilization of the protocol and minimizing the variables that I followed in my session contributed to the stability and clarity of the psychedelic window that opened in my sessions. I always followed the same protocol, the same set and setting, the same sitter, who was my former wife, my wife at the time, Carol, who is a clinical psychologist, the same substance, the same dose level, even the same location and the same recording process. I think this provided a very stable reception platform that allowed my sessions to develop clean. Clearly over time. Now I did this work as rigorously as I could. I kept detailed records, making an exhaustive, descriptive account within 24 hours of each session, I tracked the dates, and that's Rick Tarnas is a good friend of mine, and I've learned, as we've all read his book, psyche and Cosmos, I track the astrological variables to see what the interplay was between my experiences and the astrological transits. I want to emphasize that the story that I'm telling in LSD, in the mind of the universe, is not primarily a personal story. It's primarily a cosmological story. The personal is the least important in my experiences. After the first 10 sessions or so, the portion of the experiences that were relevant to my personal life tended to come up in the beginning and endings of the sessions represented by these small circles that are drawn at the beginning and endings of the sine waves, which represent psychedelic sessions. When I was coming back, leaving and coming back into space time, I often had many insights and many gifts given me about my personal life. But when I was in the peak hours of psychedelic arousal, I was at the top of these waves and experiencing. I was having experiences that far transcended my personal life as represented in these larger circles. And that's the story I'm telling in LSD, in the mind of the universe, that's the philosophically interesting story that is the universal story. And it's a story which is basically telling the developmental sequence of experiences over these hilltop perspectives.

Chris Bache  11:55  
Now there are many ways in which you can use psychedelics. Let me identify three uses. First is using it in a to for therapeutic healing, to heal the wounds of our personal psyche. This is the dominant form in which psychedelics are being used and studied today. Second is to use them for spiritual awakening to cultivate that radical, transparent condition of our being in which we stand completely conscious, completely naked and completely receptive to the ever changing field of experience. The third usage is cosmological exploration. These are distinct, if mutually reinforcing, undertakings, how you use psychedelics, dose levels, circumstances, set and setting are different in each of these settings, and I think it's important to make sure that we don't judge one project by criteria that are relevant to another project. Okay. Now, in these experiences, when one works with very high doses of LSD, one goes through a series of Death-Rebirth experiences. In this image, the drop at the center, underneath the line represents our egoic consciousness, our private consciousness. Everything above the line represents spiritual reality, Transpersonal consciousness, the first Death-Rebirth experience, takes place at the interface of our time, space consciousness and the beginnings of spiritual consciousness. And it's usually referred to as ego death. It is the complete destruction of our personal time, space identity, and the beginning of an opening into spiritual reality. But if we continue this process, if we press deeper and deeper into spiritual reality, we go through more deaths, more cycles of death and rebirth at the psychic, subtle and causal levels of consciousness. To use terms that Stan uses. Now I have no vested interest in a particular cosmological map that delineates the various strata, strata of Transpersonal consciousness. Here, I'm simply trying to make a point that as you go into deeper levels of consciousness, you come to certain gateways, and at these gateways, you must give up everything, everything you have known up to this point in time, in your journey, in order to enter into the new fields of consciousness that are beginning to open to you. Now, one does not simply enter into spiritual reality and pluck these experiences from the universe like one plucks an apple. A tree drawing on Jorge Farrah's insights in his wonderful book, revisiting Transpersonal theory, I hold that all psychedelic experience is participatory. This means that our being evokes in complex ways that portion of the universe that we encounter our mind acts as a seed crystal that catalyzes a certain set of experiences from the cosmic mind's infinite potential. As we are gradually purified and transformed by this process, it evokes still deeper experiences from the universe. In my experience, one session more or less started where the previous session stopped, there was a gradual and consistent unfolding into deeper and deeper levels of reality. This may not be true in other people's experiences. It simply is true. Let me give you a different image for this process. LSD is often likened to the atomic bomb, which was invented in the same decade. Here I'm using the nuclear explosion as an image of the type of come bus combustive fire that is generated in a long series of sessions, that generates this cycle of death and rebirth. And as this cycle continues, it activates and brings into our conscious awareness deeper levels of the of the universe, just as this nuclear explosion brings into visible form different levels of the atmosphere there were always there from the beginning, but were basically hidden and invisible. And it is the power of the psychedelic dynamic that brings these dimensions of existence into our into our conscious awareness. Now we're not talking about nuclear explosions. We're talking about an exploration into the mind of the universe, an exploration into the cosmic mind. When I was at the end of my journey, and looking back over its length, identified different strata, different layers that I had entered systematically over the course of these 20 years. And I would count five of them, the first having to do with my personal mind. The second having to do with collective mind, the mind of our species. The third, having to do with archetypal mind. The fourth, causal oneness, and the fifth, diamond Luminosity. So what I'd like to do now is simply take you into the book, chapter by chapter, with just a few highlighted comments of the content of each chapter, just to illustrate, just to invite you into into the dialog that you will find unfolded in LSD, in the mind of the universe. So first the personal mind. There is the chapter crossing the boundary of birth and death. This refers to crossing what Stan calls the perinatal level of consciousness. Now there is a previous chapter, the chapter on methodology, where I lay out the method of the work. Then there is a chapter three in which I basically take the reader into a typical session day to show them what it's like. But content wise, we begin here. Now, if you're familiar with Stan Grof work, and I'm assuming most of you are this is classic perinatal material, deep confrontations with death and fetal sensations, severe existential confrontations, tremendous perinatal seizures, purifying the body and the emotional field, culminating an ego death. And in ego death, our identity, our time, space, identity, is just turned inside out. In my case, my ego death, I was forced to become the exact opposite of everything I had ever known myself to be. The Universe just reached down and snapped me like a trick a twig in the beginning of the day, I had always known myself as being male, as being an intellectual, being college educated, and being passionately interested in the meaning of life. In this session, I was forced to become. Complete opposite of all these things, and it was as if the universe was telling me where you are going. Gender does not exist. I had to let go of everything I was in order to go into what was coming next. And what was coming next really surprised me in what I later came to call the exercises of collective death and rebirth and first, the ocean of suffering. Over the course of two years, I was repeatedly and systematically immersed in experiences of collective anguish that shattered all my frames of reference and completely dwarfing the previous phase I entered a notion of suffering that eventually expanded systematically to encompass what appeared to be the entire history of the human species. The dying in these sessions was almost entirely collective. The surrender that was demanded was the ordeal of repeatedly opening to the sheer enormity and savagery, savagery of this ocean of pain. Now first, I thought this represented a deepening of ego death, but it went on for so long and it involved so many beings that eventually I changed my mind. I came to the conclusion that these collective episodes were not primarily aimed at the transformation of my personal consciousness. They were aimed at healing some portion of the collective unconscious of humanity, healing scars accumulated through history and still carried in our collective memory.

Chris Bache  21:53  
Now, in my experience, in a session, there are essentially two phases. There is the first phase, the cleansing phase, purification phase, and the second phase, the ecstatic phase, the ocean of suffering, I said, lasted two years. Actually, it lasted one year, and then I took a six year break, and then it I started again, and the ocean of suffering resumed in that first year, when I went into the ecstatic phase of the sessions, I entered what I came to call deep time in the chapter, deep time in the soul, when I would come out of the ocean of suffering, I entered a state in which these seven sessions gave me an experience of my life as a completed whole, as a totality, from beginning to end, the visions were stable and systematically developed. Each session built upon the previous session. The sessions, their sequences were repeated, unfolding in greater detail and with deepening emphasis. Now, I found that it was an extraordinary challenge to hold on to these experiences of deep time. The first time I came back from deep time, the experiences which had been the most meaningful experiences of my life. At that point in time, I could not hold on to them. My mind had no hope to place that with repetition, when I would go back to the same state of consciousness again and again, I was able to hold on to more and more of the experiences. And this is an important epistemological point. You have to train yourself to stay conscious in these deep states of consciousness, you have to undergo a rigorous, systematic commitment to learning how to stay awake in states of consciousness that, in the beginning, completely swallow you a pole, but if you practice you can maintain epistemological clarity in these states. So during this year, I had many teachings about reincarnation, about karmic cause and effect, and the deeper intentionality operating in life. And then I stopped my work for six years for reasons that I describe in the book. When I resumed six years later, the ocean of suffering started exactly where it had stopped before, and continued to build in intensity over the remaining year, seven more sessions in a different time of my life with different expectations and under different astrological transits, the ocean of suffering began exactly where it had stopped, which I think reflects the depth and power of the intelligence. And consciousness that is directing these episodes, certainly not my intelligence, something larger than my intelligence. When I went into the ecstatic portion of these sessions, I entered a completely different reality than deep time in the soul. I entered, in a sense, what I came to call an initiation into the universe. It did involve transcending time in different ways, but I was given a systematic series of initiations into the universe and into the creative intelligence behind the physical universe. The sequence was deliberate and well crafted. It felt like an infinite intelligence was educating me, reminding me of things long ago forgotten, but now in need of being remembered. Now little note I give my psychedelic sessions names. I take detailed notes, I break them down into bullet points, and I give them names, because my intention is to try to hold all of my experiences in my mind at the same time. And so when I see the name of the session, it reminds me of the content of the session. So the names of the sessions that I address in this chapter are this. We don't have time for me to go into these sessions beyond what I've already said. The name suggests some of the content. It was just an extraordinary philosophical adventure being taken by what appeared to be the creative intelligence of the universe, deeper and deeper into the mysteries of creation and deeper into humanity's destiny. When the ocean of suffering came to a culmination in this session 24 healing the collective wound. I was spun into archetypal reality in the chapter the greater real of archetypal reality. Let me see if I can there we go. This lasted one and a half years and 11 sessions. It I was entering a reality that immediately and consistently was more real felt more real than physical reality. It was a domain behind physical reality and the source of the structures that exist inside space and time. When I first entered archetypal reality, my identity as a human being began to fall away from me. I learned that we have a sense of a sense of species identity that is more basic than our individual identity, and surrendering this species identity represented a deeper form of surrender and a deeper death than ego. Death to die out of human consciousness was to begin to exist in a domain of consciousness completely beyond the human species field. This transition was marked with extremely high levels of energy. I was plunged into white hot lava flows, exploding Sun fare flares, liquid fire pouring through me, completely consuming me, very different from the death that I had gone through in the perinatal level of consciousness, my experiences in archetypal reality, basically could be broken down into two categories, two levels, one at the highest subtle level and one at the lower subtle level, at the higher subtle level, which I would call the Platonic level, I encountered living forms responsible for creating space time and the core structures within space time, they were too vast for me to grasp. Even in my expanded psychedelic state, I could catch only glimpses of them. I saw them as galaxies, billions of light years across massive structures, but this was simply the best my mind could do to wrap itself around the realities that I was experiencing. These were archetypes, but not Plato's eternal ideas in the mind of an unchanging God, but vast living dynamic forces embodying higher orders of intentionality and power and operating on a different order of time entirely, at the lower, subtle level, at a. More Jung Ian level, I was immersed in the living tissue of our species through a long series of experiences. I was repeatedly experiencing our species as a single organism interlaced with an intelligent network of meta functions. I experienced all of our individual minds as nodal points within the collective mind. I experienced all the issues that we confront in our life, both psychological issues and biological issues, as all part of a larger living tapestry of cause and effect weaving throughout the entire species, I experienced our collect our individual bodies as cells within our larger collective body,

Chris Bache  30:54  
and I began to have experiences of reincarnation as a collective process. Up to this point in time, I had already experienced reincarnation, or thought about reincarnation in terms of a personal, soul generated process and that and it was about our individual evolution and confronting individual karma. But I had many experiences during this time of our entire species, reincarnating with Common Cause, I began to experience billions of human beings incarnating over and over again, and driving the evolution of our entire species forward. I was given many insights into into the dynamics of collective purification and collective transformation. And this is why, in my book, Dark Night early dawn, the fundamental theme of that book has to do with the processes, the dynamics of collective transformation. Dark Night early dawn is about the collective dark night and the early dawn is about our collective transformation and history. This was simultaneously a Numinous, Numinous experience and a devastating experience to experience billions of lives as cells within an organism that was evolving itself on the face of our planet was just a devastating experience and an ecstatic experience. Now the titles of the essay, of the sessions that I address in this chapter are these.

Chris Bache  32:40  
You can see how much cleansing is involved, even at this rather advanced level. And this reflects an important truth. Deeper levels of reality are higher levels of energy, and when one wants to enter, if you want to enter and stabilize your consciousness at these deeper levels of reality, you must adapt to and adjust to this energy. It's like mountain climbing. When you climb a mountain, you're adapt. You're adjusting to less oxygen. When you're working through deeper levels of consciousness, you're adjusting to more energy. You must literally become a being who can sustain these high levels of energy for eight hours at a time. Session 28 was my first and brief contact with causal level reality. It was an exceptionally clear, dramatic and beautiful session, but just touching the purity of causal level reality was so intense that it triggered hours and hours of cleansing that lasted over three sessions stretched over six months. The cleansing was some type of purification process that was making it possible for me to return to this level of reality, but to maintain coherent cognitive focus at this deep level, which then led to a rather startling experience, the flash of God in session 33 after this, I entered an extraordinary year of immersion in causal oneness, in a chapter that I call a benediction of blessings. It lasted one year and eight sessions. So after spending 18 months exploring archetypal reality, which, of course, is very quickly, I mean, I just was moving through this material, just touching base, just moving through very quickly the year. That followed was one of extra ordinary blessings. It was a veritable benediction of blessings as I entered the great depth of causal reality. And these are the names of the sessions that I address in the book. These were preceded by more experiences of death and more experiences of fierce purification. The forest was an experience of causal oneness, of Shunyata, emptiness of self, no self in me, no self in any other. Just as sun and sun and air moves through in a forest without paying any attention to the particular type of tree that it's moving through. Singing the universe away was an experience of the primal void that lies beneath our universe and gives birth to it, day by day, second by second. Jesus's blood was an experience of cosmic love, the most intense experience of love that I had ever known in my life, and then the birth of the diamond soul. And let me mention something about this, just very briefly, because it it's really a pivotal was a pivotal session for me, and it comes up later in the book. Previously I had experienced my life as a completed whole. Now, 11 years later, I experienced all of my former lives being rewound, one by one, coming together and being rewound like winding kite string on a spool until eventually, the spool exploded in a burst of light, fusing all the strands together and giving birth to what I came to call the diamond soul. The diamond soul was composed of many lifetimes, but it was more than the sum of all their years. This experience showed me. I think where reincarnation is taking us. It would take us too long to go into in great detail, but basically, I think the visions of reincarnation that we have lived with over the last 2000 years are are incomplete. They haven't they have a vision of that we're we're growing incrementally, lifetime by lifetime, becoming more knowing more becoming more compassionate, becoming more intelligent, incremental adjustments. But I think that there is more at foot underneath this process. Eventually we there comes a time through the constant expansion and contraction, through dying and returning to the soul and being born and contracting into the ego and buying in the soul and coming back into the ego. Eventually, there comes a time, I believe, where all of our former lives come together as one, and when they come together as one, they catapult us into a condition of being which is not simply a refined and purified future life. It is a being catapulted into a different order of life, a different order of being itself. I think what is happening over the long story of reincarnation is that the soul is being born inside time and space. This is what I call the birth of the diamond soul. Now from here, I went into the diamond Luminosity work. Now notice I've skipped chapter nine. I wish I had actually written these in a different order. I wish I had had 10 before chapter nine. But I'm going to skip over nine for the moment, because the work went into the diamond Luminosity material. The benediction of blessings felt like the closing of a great circle. It gave me a feeling of deep completion, a sense of inheriting blessings for work done in the ocean of suffering. I had given something to the universe that was mine to give, and the universe had given me back more treasures than I could hold. I felt complete and utterly satisfied. I had no idea where the sessions would go next, but there was still five years ahead,

Chris Bache  39:38  
after going through yet one more intense cycle of death and rebirth, I was spun into a brilliantly clear radiance that Buddhism calls Dharmakaya. I came to call it the domain of diamond Luminosity. Now, I had known light many times before, but this. Was an exceptionally pure light. This domain captivated me so completely that it extinguished any interest I had in exploring the other levels of existence that had previously fascinated me. This was a different order of reality altogether. Its clarity was so overwhelming, its energy so pure that returning to it became my sole focus in future sessions over the next four years and 26 sessions, the diamond Luminosity domain opened to me only four times, and these are the four sessions that I describe, that I present in this chapter.

Chris Bache  40:52  
My understanding is that the diamond Luminosity is an extra Samsara reality that is, it lies outside the Bardo, outside of Samsara, outside all the cycles of physical reality and the Bardo realities of psychic reality, the pure light. It is the pure light from which the universe arises and returns. It is Dharmakaya, the clear light of absolute reality. Now, in between these four Immersions in Diamond Luminosity, there were many intense episodes of cleansing and personal healing in general, there were two movements during this four year period. There was first a movement of going deeper into diamond Luminosity, and then a movement to diamond Luminosity began to crunch itself more deeply into my physical body. And the turning point for this was session 50. I only began to understand what was happening after the fact. Always, I had no control over what was happening in the sessions I had basically went along with whatever the universe was, wherever it was taking me, and only figured out after the fact what was taking place. In Session 50, I was as deep into the universe as I ever went. In any of my sessions, I was in the clearest, most sublime state of diamond Luminosity that I had ever known. And then in that session, everything in my visual field pivoted 90 degrees, and I saw a reality far into the distance that looked like luminous galaxies, and a ray of light from that reality hit me, and it absolutely shattered me. I call it the absolute light, just to give it a name. But what it showed me is that the universe that we are exploring in these deep states of consciousness is endless. I would never get to the end of the divine mind. I would never get to the end of the cosmic mind, even using this powerful method of exploration. This was a turning point in my thinking, because I had adopted the belief that I inherited from other people, that there was an end point to this journey, that there was a point that you came to which represented your ultimate destination. Some had described it as oneness with God, or as the return to the primal void. But I had experienced one oneness with God many times, and what I learned is that there are many permutations and degrees of oneness. And I had entered in the primal void several times, and I learned that there, too, there are degrees of void. When I first entered the diamond Luminosity. It came. It brought such a feeling of Homecoming, such a feeling of absolute peace and contentment. I thought that I had finally found what I was looking for. I had finally found my ultimate destination. And then practically I did. It completely satisfied all my philosophical and spiritual longing. But just at the peak of this satisfaction, the universe showed me that it is an Infinite Journey. It is an infinite being that we are exploring in our lives. This both first shattered me and then relaxed me into infinite wonder. And this is one of the reasons why I would be gentler with myself if I were doing this today, because one of the things I've learned on this journey is that the goal is not to get somewhere, to get to a particular state of consciousness or particular state of being. The goal of this. Work, I think, is to open up to the universe and let as much of it as possible into your being, to let as much of the love and as much of the intelligence and as much of the power and consciousness into your being and stabilize it and hold it and live your life, living by its truths. After this session 50, the next sessions really seemed to take me into the diamond light, but the diamond light was crunching itself deeper and deeper into my body, changing even what I think of as the physiological structure, the cellular structure of my body. And now to the chapter I skipped over the birth of the future human. When I began this work in 1979 I never imagined that humanity's future would become part of this story, but now I think this may be the most important chapter of the book, because it speaks of our children and our children's children, as far as we can see, it speaks of a crossroads humanity is coming too, and of powerful forces taking us into a future that will change us at the deepest levels of our being. In this chapter, I summarize bits and pieces of experiences and visions that actually go all the way back to the initiation into the universe material and run all the way through up into session 55 these are the sessions that I discuss, that I present in this chapter here. I collect the pieces of visions. I extract them from sessions 23 to 47 and gather them together in what I call the visions of awakening, there are six visions of awakening. Are six themes that kept showing themselves over and over in these visions concerning humanity's future. The themes of those six visions are divine love all humanity that the universe is trying to awaken all humanity that is being enacted by guiding intelligence that's guiding our evolutionary process, our species as a single being, again seeing the awakening as not simply a number of individuals awakening, but our entire species going through the awakening process, the theme of collective purification, again, through the dynamics of reincarnation, that we are undergoing a collective purification, and finally, the experience of the future human being given the grace of experiencing the future human that is being born in history. But nowhere in these visions over these four years, nowhere in these visions was it shown me how this was going to take place. The vision was that we were coming into a period of profound spiritual awakening, a shift in the fundamental architecture of the collective psyche, a shift that will change the foundation of human existence on this planet. But it had not shown me how. And then in session 55 right in the middle of the diamond Luminosity sessions, I was taken deep into deep time, and I was given an experience of the death and rebirth of humanity, well, of the death and rebirth of humanity, for there to be a great awakening in the human heart, in our collective human heart, there must first take place a great death. We must be emptied of the old before the new can fully emerge. I believe that the 21st Century will be such a time. It will begin the dark night of our collective soul, a time of emptying, of intense anguish, of loss of control and breakdown, a collective purification unto death that will last generations. But through this hard labor, we will give birth to something extraordinary, more than just a new civilization. What is emerging is nothing less than a new order of human being through the global systems crisis, our planet is giving birth. Us to the future human and when I first described these themes in dark night, early dawn, it sounds quite appropriate for our times that we are living in now. But I would just remind you that these visions were taking place in the early 90s. The Great Awakening session took place in 1995 25 years ago. At that time, it was completely beyond my purview that we were going into such an enormous watershed moment in history,

Chris Bache  50:39  
in my visions concerning the human where humanity is, it was as though the transformation of humanity as a whole was the only thing that creative intelligence really cared about. Everything else, my life, our lives, everything we are struggling with in history, was part of this larger project. It was the context that framed all of our endeavors. It was the work of the hour. Now my visions did not give me any details of when and where, so don't ask. It showed me the fact of this collective awakening. It took me into the collective psyches experience of this death and rebirth, and it gave me insights into the mechanisms of our collective transformation. There's probably not time here to discuss these mechanisms, though I think they're really important, and it has to do two things with the unified field, that the collective species mind is underneath all of our individual experiences, and the perception that then the enormous suffering that is being that will be generated by a global ecological crisis leading to a global systems crisis. This suffering will impact not just individuals, but it will actually stimulate the collective psyche so deeply it'll shift the collective psyche into what we would call nonlinear conditions. And we know something about non linear systems from physical systems when they are shoved into non linear states. And there is a parallel between what can happen to a psychic system, a field of psychological energy, and what happens to physical systems when they are both shoved into non linear conditions, heightened creativity, higher self organization, the capacity for rapidly accelerated change and small inputs leading to enormous outcomes.

Chris Bache  52:59  
The final vision to bring the journey to a close, just touching it very briefly. Actually, the seven, the three sessions that I discussed in this chapter, the final vision, this was one of the most intense sessions that I went through anywhere on my journey. In it the universe put me through a strip down that was more violent and more radical than any strip down I had ever gone through at any other time in my journey. And it did so, I think in order to catapult me more deeply into deep time than it ever taken me before. I won't try to reproduce or tell you much about that. I will invite you simply to look at it in the book itself. It was the final vision given me as a capstone to the long story of where humanity is going. It showed me things about the evolutionary process that I have held dear to my heart ever since. It showed me things about our universe, that our universe is a diamond maker, making diamond souls, and it cares very little whether it takes a million or billion years for us to interest, for it to produce the souls that it is creating. And it gave me my deepest experience of the future human, an extraordinary being, just, just an extraordinary being. The last chapter is coming off the mountain. This chapter was the longest to write, and in it, I describe two things that I have struggled with and confronted in the years after my journey. I ended

Chris Bache  55:05  
the first I called the deep sadness I had been given so many blessings on this journey, I thought that I could simply step away and spend the rest of my life digesting these treasures, but in the years following my sessions, I began to experience a deep existential sadness I had been taken so deep into the divine, into the divine expanse, so many times, that I was suffering from a loss of communion with the divine. Once you have known the joy of becoming light, once you have experienced the ecstasy of dissolving into the crystalline body of God, life on Earth, can begin to feel dried up. I found that I no longer wanted to be here, and this is similar to what some people who have near death episodes experience when they return here. They are plunged deeply into the light, the divine light filled with overwhelming love, and then suddenly they're back on Earth with all the limitations of earthly experience. It's hard to make that transition. I knew that I was every moment immersed in the body of the Divine. I knew that she was the root and the flower of my existence. But this knowledge did not save me entirely from the pain of being separated from the full intensity of her presence. It took me about 10 years to become fully grounded and comfortable living inside space, time again. But there was a second factor contributing to my disharmony, and this is what I call the sickness of silence. Because of our restrictive laws around psychedelics, I was not allowed to speak about my experience to others. I am a natural born teacher. I love to learn new things and share that knowledge, but I was not allowed to teach from my psychedelic experiences in the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies, I had to keep silent about the most philosophically meaningful experiences of my life. How can you behold under such restrictive conditions, over time, this enforced silence made me sick inside. Living in a psychedelic closet is just as damaging to your soul as living in any other closet where you are forced to deny your true nature, writing LSD in the mind of the universe, and speaking openly about my psychedelic experiences, as I'm speaking to you tonight, is, is been, has been part of my personal path to becoming whole upon this earth once again, to become in my Public Life what I have been in my private life, and in closing, I'd like to leave you with this thought. I still have many questions about what it means to integrate experiences such as those that I've been describing tonight. I think we are still in the early stages of understanding how entering such extreme states of consciousness is affecting us in the long term. What does it do to a person to hold the kind of memories that I am holding? What does integration even mean in this context, how does a time bound person, a time bound being exquisitely tuned to the conditions of space time, absorb excursions into deep time? How does a finite being digest our forays into the infinite? What is the residual impact of merging with all of existence after we have returned to being just one among many? I am asking more questions than I have answers for my life has become a living experiment in these matters, with the outcome still being determined. But I say again, I would not have missed this journey for anything in the world. It has been the philosophical and spiritual adventure of a lifetime, and I take great. Joy and sharing it with you tonight. Thank you.

David Lorimer  1:00:07  
Thank you very much indeed, Chris. If you could just stop your screen share. That would be good. There we go. My eyes, I'm on. Well, I don't know how many of you have read Chris's book or his article and the earlier book, which I read 20 years ago, dark night or early dawn, but it's, it's, it's a pretty shattering experience to read, let alone go through. And one of the things that I felt was that Chris has done something on our undertaken this journey on our behalf, so that we can borrow, in inverted commas, some of his insights, which I think are hugely important for our own understanding of who we are and where we're going. And so I just two, I'm just going to make two or three observations, then we're going to have a break and then come back for back for questions session. One of the main questions you can ask about, what Chris has been talking about, is, does what he is conveying here give us access to the deep structure of reality, or to the deep, deeper structures of reality. And this is something that we ask in the Galileo commission report, in which Harold argues in the affirmative, in other words, that they do. And this would correspond to the third bar of Jeff Kripal, who was with us a couple of weeks ago. Now, do these experiences have important implications for understanding of consciousness and reality? Well, my answer would be absolutely. But obviously, everybody has to make their draw their own conclusion, and what you'll find, what I found is that I have an extensive background in near death and mystical experiences in terms of the literature, which many other people on the call also have, and it's consistent with all that, but it takes it a bit further, in fact, a lot, and it's a kind of Ultimate Gnosis, or knowing by identification, and then observation is that we are clearly living in apocalyptic time here at one level or another, and about the evolutionary prospects and the birth of the future Human has an extraordinary resonance, I think, at this time, and it's something that Ann bearing was, he's on the call tonight, who was referring to last week. And so it'll be very interesting to see how people feel about that. We've got a lot of questions that have come up already and in the chat box, but we'll get some live contributions and so Chris, wonderful. Thank you very, very much indeed for sharing that so lucidly. Paul from Poland, you have a question?

Speaker 1  1:03:17  
Hello, yes, I'm Hi, Chris, a very nice presentation. I mean, you know, whenever you use the word universe, something just sticks in me. As an astronomer, I know galaxies. I know stars, clusters of galaxies, vast physical spaces. That's what universe means to me. Now, I have a universe in a very different way, but I doubt. But again, you know, I question whether it doesn't see when, again, when you say, God, I don't universe, you know the universe? It's a place where, well, anyway, it's a long subject. I think I've asked my question anyway, if you could elaborate a little by what you mean by universe, so that yeah,

Chris Bache  1:04:20  
you're absolutely right, Paul, you've caught me out on this. I struggle with language. I struggle with how to describe some of these realities that I've entered. I don't like using the word God. I don't use it much, but I use it once in a while, and I don't like using it because it carries so much baggage from history, and what most people mean by God is not what I mean by God. And so I'll use the word divine sometimes, but that's just a bit of a ruse, because there it comes back to the same but I'm trying to strip the concept free of the historical accumulation. So to me, I collect pictures of of galaxies. I collect, collect pictures of nebulas. And when I, when I move into meditation practice, I just will play them over and over and over again, because this is my God. This is my divine and it what I'm referring to. What my experience is is not to the outer body of the Divine, though I was taken into exploring some of the body of the universe. But if I were a physicist, and I would love to have degrees in physics and go into these states, because they this consciousness could have shown me so much more if I had degrees in astrophysics and degrees in quantum theory, just my mind was not tuned to that type of knowledge. I'm talking about the consciousness which is the the consciousness of the universe, the consciousness which has given birth to the universe. And I'm just scraping the edges of it. I'm just touching the pieces of it, my experience of it is certainly limited by what I can understand because, and again, what I would love to do is have 100 of our best, brightest, most talented scientist, artists, social activists, going into these states in a systematic fashion. I mean, can you imagine a protocol if we had 100 of such people working one day a month for two years, what body of knowledge they would come back with and would be able to share? It's never the experience of the any individual which is important. It's the experience of our collective of our collective genius and our collective talent as we are engaged. So I stretch language. I stretch language. It's as big as the universe. It's, it's deeper than time, it's, it's more intelligent than any intelligence I can ever been able to touch inside time and space and the compassion, which is the emotion of oneness. It's when the quantum physicists talk about, you know, the implicate order, the oneness that underlies all manifest existence, that implicate order has a wholeness, that when I touch it, it just explodes me with love, because love is the emotion of oneness. But I don't mean love in an ordinary sense of love, but it's kind of the closest approximation I have. So you're right that I am using universe in a borrowed fashion, and I'm using it in an extrapolated fashion.

David Lorimer  1:07:39  
Thank you very much. I think it's I mean, what? For those of you who've read the book, you'll you'll understand that the or the books that, for me, the way that you, you articulate these ineffable experiences into language gives me the sense that I'm I'm as near vicariously as I can get to that Gnosis, the understanding from within and in the Galileo Commission, we talk about exploring inner space. And so in that sense, you're a Psychonaut, obviously, of exploration of inner space. So thank you very much for that question. Next question is from our president, Professor, Bernard Carr in London.

Speaker 2  1:08:28  
Bernard, Oh, hi there, Chris, good to see you, and you too. First of all, thank you for well, for taking this, this cosmic journey, and then for coming to, coming back to tell us all about it. It was absolutely engrossing. I noticed at one point you said you rather wish you had a degree in astrophysics, and then you will be able to in another way. Well, I have a degree in astrophysics, and I rather wish I had a degree in psychedelics. But my question really is a follow up to Paul kind of it's this question about the use of the word universe, because there's sort of a distinction between your constant references to humanity as a species, and then your description in cosmological terms, Where you know even your images are from cosmology, and you said that in some sense that you that was poetic license. But on the other hand, it does seem to me that if you really are contacting in that greater reality, that cosmic consciousness, you really will be contacting if you like, a cosmic level of consciousness, not just the terrestrial level of consciousness. And if, for example, one studies the writings of Buddha, when Buddha in the vasuti Marga, when he had his experiences, he was very explicit in the fact that he was experiencing realities beyond the normal terrestrial, you know, the galactic and the cosmic and things like that. So my question was this, although you're always referring to humanity, humanity is something which, by definition, is very much linked with Planet Earth. Did you ever feel that actually what you were encountering was something on a scale much larger than humanity? In other words, that it really was cosmic.

Chris Bache  1:10:23  
Yes, absolutely. And again, I wish I had your degrees. The universe could have taught me so much more than but when I entered in dark, into archetypal reality, and I said, I died as a human being, as of my species identity. From that point on in the journey my sessions basically took me outside of the operational range of our collective psyche, outside of human experience, outside of human history, when I began to move beyond the collective psyche, everything associated and held within the collective psyche began to fall away. All our understandings of God, all our projections of God, all the the flotsam and jetsam of history just fell away, and I moved into these hyper, increasingly clear, hyper clear states of consciousness harder to describe because so contentless. And I don't think I, I think we can be very cavalier about language, and I and I apologize if I've contributed to that, but I think when we talk about universal mind or cosmic mind. These are huge, huge concepts, and I would say that the only part of that mind that I know and learned about was the part that it taught me about. There was a consciousness which took me in. There was a consciousness that taught me, broke me down, count me, grounded me up into dust, and took me deeper and deeper into itself. But even so, I know I was only experiencing pieces, aspects, fractal manifestations of its totality. So my language peters out at that deep level. In when I moved into diamond Luminosity, I had a very clear perception of moving outside of Samsara, outside the Bardo, into a reality that's truly even outside archetypal reality. There was a period when I was born into archetypal reality, and then there was a process in which I was born out of archetypal reality into into a level of reality which pre exists before archetypal reality?

Speaker 2  1:12:52  
Yeah, non physical, yeah.

Chris Bache  1:12:55  
Thank you very absolutely non physical.

David Lorimer  1:12:59  
I'm just going to take an observation from the chat from Sri about in your journeys, did you get a sense of why we seem to learn only through pain and suffering the divine heritage we come from or must return to? Why was this path into matter, back back to into spirit, necessary? And of course, that's sort of 64,000 and it reminds me of this, which you will have heard before, probably, that there are only two reasons we change, desperation or inspiration, where we certainly change, if we're desperate and we can preemptively change, perhaps if we're inspired. I mean, for me, this is part of the kind of gnostic myth that we forget, we fall into darkness, we try and return to the light, and we forget who we are. We then have to try and remember who we are. We go to sleep. We have to wake up. It just seems to be how things are constituted. Is that your view? Or do you have another

Chris Bache  1:13:55  
I agree with you, and this is my experience. Is when I would go deeper and deeper and deeper into these levels of reality. I always experienced it as a remembering. I was remembering. I was remembering, and I didn't. I don't have any sense that in forgetting that that was a tragedy, or that was somehow my mistake, or some cosmic sin, or some, you know, original sin, it seemed to be part of the natural order of things. There is the greater and there is the lesser. When we come into the lesser, we forget, but we have to remember, everything that we're describing is constantly changing. It's constantly evolving. So that I don't think, I think, I think we have had a tendency to sort of freeze our level of evolutionary maturity and to form judgments around how we got here, where we're going and what we're doing. And we have to let go of all these sort of fixated fragments, because the human being as Sri Aurobindo. Said, is a transitional being. We are moving from what we were to what we are becoming. We are changing. Life is changing. Planets are changing. Our species is changing. We are in movement. And so why things are the way they are isn't on isn't something that we can answer on an absolute scale. It's something we can only answer on an evolving try to answer an evolving scale. But that, of course, requires expanding our time horizon enormously. When a geologist helps us expand our time horizon and helps us understand plate tectonics, that's extraordinarily exciting, or when a physicist helps us understand the evolution of galaxies, it's extraordinarily exciting. This is something similar. We have to expand beyond our personal consciousness to to have something about the intentionality that's manifesting itself in this ever evolving, magnificent universe that we are part of.

David Lorimer  1:16:00  
So we need to tune into that part of ourselves that we not take any more questions. By the way, we need to tune into that part of ourselves which knows, as you said, that we're here. We're here for the ride. No, fasten the seat belts, or maybe not fasten the seat belts. So we, if we, if we're really centered as we go through this process, and then we'll get the guidance we need, both individually and collectively. But we need to listen to that, that guidance, and we need to enable the new shoots. And there's so much creative thinking going on. I was in a group this afternoon on the spiritual spirituality and Education Alliance and and so there's a huge amount of good going on that we don't hear about, except in positive news. Humanity rising. Thank you. That's also humanity rising, and all the ubiquity University. And so we need to keep ourselves buoyed up, I think, by by by the positive things that are going on, but also, as you say, face down the negative with with the kind of courage that you demonstrated in your journey. And so I think I thank you on behalf of us all for the journey you took and for bringing back these treasures, these gems that we can actually appreciate, and we can appropriate some of these for our own journey and understanding just because you have made that journey. And so I really salute you for that, that Odyssey, I mean, you could translate it into the hero's journey and just just a point of information for people. I mentioned Thomas troward moment ago. This is a book here which I would recommend as a good starter for from Thomas troward. It's called The Wisdom of Thomas troward, and it has four of his main sets of lectures in it. He was a judge in India, and you can really get to grips with this stuff. And so I do recommend he talked about self recognition. When the universal became the particular in us, then we had to recognize ourselves back again as the universal. And so he was actually talking about these things in his own way, no 100 years ago. So we're all trying to catch up with a perennial, as it were, and live through it. So everybody on the call. Thank you so much for coming and being part of this evening. I hope you've been inspired by it. I hope that you've learned something that you can apply to your own lives to your own journey. And and Andrew, thank you very much for all the coordination. Jess. Jessica cornet, thank you for all the help with the publicity. And Chris, thank you so much for sharing that deep wisdom, which we really all need to take on board in the the rapids that we are entering at the moment. So I look forward to seeing everybody on a future event. And good night everybody, and God bless much love and light to you all. You.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
