Andrew Holecek  0:00  
Everybody. Andrew holochick here, and I simply cannot contain my excitement about my guest for today. Dr Christopher Bache. And so with a brief introduction, we're going to launch into what I believe will be quite a revelatory, I hope, provocative conversation. So Chris PhD is professor emeritus in the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at Youngstown, Youngstown State University, where he taught for 33 years. He is also adjunct faculty at the California Institute of Medical studies, Emeritus fellow at the Institute of Noetic Sciences and on the advisory board of Grof legacy training. Chris's passion has been the study of the philosophical implications of Non-ordinary states of consciousness, especially psychedelic states. An award winning teacher and international speaker, Chris has written four books, life cycles, a study of reincarnation in light of contemporary consciousness research, dark night, early dawn, a pioneering work in psychedelic philosophy and collective consciousness, the living classroom and exploration of collective fields of consciousness and teaching and LSD and the mind of the universe, the story of his 20 year journey with LSD. Chris is a father of three. About You, ianna practitioner, and lives in Weaverville, North Carolina with his wife, Christina Hardy, oh my gosh, Chris, where do we start? Right? First of all, thank you, my dear friend, for for taking time out of your busy schedule to talk with us. It's a pleasure. Really. I've been looking forward to this one for a while, and so oh my gosh. Just some preparatory comments before we launch in. I have read a fair amount over my years. I consider myself a bit of a an academic. I love to read. I love to devour books, and I have to say, I have never read anything like your last book, LSD and the mind of the universe, and so out of all the books that you've written, this is the one I really want to focus on, because it's no exaggeration to say that it really stretched my mind open, challenged me. And maybe we can talk about some of the areas where I was challenged created both tremendous resonance with my own path and also some dissonance. And so that's a great way to make modern music, right? So maybe, maybe we can create a symphony of sanity with with some questions to you, of which there is no shortage, but one kind of preparatory comment, there's a term by the Eco philosopher Timothy Morton that I really quite like. He talks about hyper objects, and he refers to this in relationship to climate change. When you have something that is just so enormous that is really difficult to wrap your mind around it, it just defies description. It's literally mind bending, mind stretching, and then maybe even mind blowing, and it's no exaggeration that your book and your journey is a hyper object to me, and I can't tell you how it's impacted me and how I want to really get into some of the nitty gritty of what you went through. But in order to give our listeners even a rough idea of what we're going to be talking about, perhaps give us a long elevator pitch. Okay, so this is we have 1000 floors to a sand, right? So this is a long elevator pitch. Share with us, if you would, a little bit about this book before we get into the weeds, and I start exploring particular topics with you, yeah,

Chris Bache  3:45  
well, I know it's a radical book, and I think we are at a pivot point in history, and I think that psychedelics represent a major transition point, a true historical before And after point with respect to philosophy, not just psychology. It generates not only a new therapeutic protocol for healing the personal psyche, but literally, a new way of doing philosophy. It's not really new, because it goes back to the elysinian mysteries and the Ayahuasca traditions in Brazil, but I got involved in it right out of graduate school. I had just finished my PhD from Brown University. I went to work in Ohio, at Youngstown State. I was looking around for where to begin, where to continue my research. I was a pretty deeply convinced agnostic at the time, and I encountered realms of the human unconscious. Stan Grof first book, and that was a turning point in my life, quickly followed by his methodology book, LSD, psychotherapy. This was 1978 when I began graduate school, and I saw the significance of his work for philosophy, for my tradition. Tradition, which was philosophy of religion. And I I knew that I needed to do this work, that this would the people making the most substantive contributions to my discipline in the future would be people writing out of an experiential basis, not simply an intellectual basis. So I began to work privately. I split my life into two. On my day job, I was a traditional academic, you know, teaching courses, grading papers, going to meetings and all that. And in my private life, I began a 20 year journey working following Stan Grof protocol. I ended up working with high doses of LSD for reasons I described in the book. This is a very aggressive protocol. It's not a protocol that I would recommend today at the end of the journey, but I basically did 73 high dose LSD sessions, let me say that each session was completely isolated. I was separated from the world. I was in what I call the psychedelic Kiva, a very protected environment separate from the world, lying down with the sitter. My sitter was a clinical psychologist who also happened to be my wife, through all of my sessions, wearing eye shades and with headphones, listening to very carefully selected music to support the deepening of the process. So that's where I began. I worked for four years. I stopped for six years again for reasons that I give in the book, and then I resume for another 10 years, and the method, the psychedelic method, as a philosophical method, involves systematically expanding the boundaries of one's consciousness. And let me say that we understand that psychedelics in general and LSD in particular, represent is an amplifier of consciousness. It doesn't give you any specific experiences. It amplifies your consciousness. Makes you hypersensitive for a number of hours at a time. How you use that hypersensitivity very much influences what emerges over a long period of time. If you go to a concert or you just sit down chat with friends, you're going to have a certain level of experience. But if you approach these hours in a contemplative manner, if you approach them as an opportunity to go deep within your consciousness, totally internalized, isolating yourself from the world, a journey begins. It's a journey that has many levels, because as we confront all the things that a hyper sensitive mind throws up to us to confront, and it usually starts with all the fears, all the things we're ashamed of, all the things we're unhappy about, those are the early confrontations that lead to the healing process. But if you keep that up, it keeps going deeper and deeper and deeper. If you navigate this, this journey carefully, I always recorded my sessions within 24 hours, and that's really important, because the more careful you are in recording your session and pondering them, the clearer, the deeper your next session is likely to be. So there's a circle of learning that's involved. So for 20 years, I kept up this systematic practice, and then I waited. I stopped it. I went from 79 to 99 and then I didn't write LSD in the universe, I didn't publish it until 20 years later. In 2019 I spent many years analyzing my experiences, pondering them, trying to sort them out, before I was ready to really publicly release this hidden side of my life. My students never learned about my psychedelic work. I kept a firewall between my public life and my private life in this regard, and it's only after I retired from the university that I've really been willing to go public on this side of my life. Amazing.

Andrew Holecek  9:16  
Even there, there's so much to talk about. Let me just if I might ping one question for you. Just briefly, I am a musician. My first degree is actually in classical piano, and so just briefly, why? Why music? What was the role of music and how did it help you? How did you choose it? I don't want to spend a ton of time on this. Yeah, but, I am interested, where did that inspiration come from, and how did, how did it end up supporting your journey? There's early

Chris Bache  9:47  
research done on how music influences psychedelic sessions. I have references to that, to the those sources in my work based. Basically it creates a field and an ambiance that supports you, letting go of your current physical reality, relaxing and yielding to this up rushing of material that comes from the unconscious. There are about five stages in a psychedelic session as the energy is building, as it's peaking, and as you're coming down, it's hours, you know, it's eight hours of the day, and you have to choose music to support each stage of that process. So the music would be very aggressive and very long, chordal sequences with powerful crescendos in the early stages, long, expansive passages in the middle stages, gradually tapering off into quieter and quieter and judgment music at the end. After of after only a year or so, I basically stopped using classical music, which is more commonly used. I shifted to using a lot of indigenous music because I found it to be more powerfully evocative. It helped me go into let go of my conventional reality and enter into unusual reality.

Andrew Holecek  11:15  
Well, that's really interesting, Chris, because in the inner yogas of tantric Buddhism, which I know you're a student of the Vajrayana. Yeah, as you know, the subtle body is actually the kind of frequency or the domain that is literally quite in resonance with sound. And so when we're actually touched by music, it's really our subtle body that is touched. And this is really interesting to me, because when you talk about this journey, which in one way, and I'll be curious to see if this resonates with you, I really appreciated your frequent allusions to the work of Carl Jung, and I don't remember you saying this overtly, but the process of individuation, how it is that bringing the unconscious processes into the light of conscious awareness is what, in fact, constitutes one vector of awakening. And so the reason this is interesting to me is that the subtle body is also connected to the unconscious mind, and so in a certain way. And let me see if this is landing with you. When you're working with this type of music, it's almost as if you're creating a tuning for Invitational harmonic in external auditory mechanisms or mediums that therefore could perhaps evoke correlative inner qualities that help you, in fact, bring these processes into the Light of Consciousness. Is it fair to say something like that?

Chris Bache  12:33  
I think that's fair. And, you know, basically, I think that's a good description. The subtle body is very actively involved in the psychedelic process when you open up into deeper states of consciousness, I learned that deeper states of consciousness are higher levels of energy, and so it places enormous demands on your physical body, but particularly their subtle energy body. And so it's very the subtle energy body is very much involved. It's a very you're moving into highly stimulated states, which are not simply psychologically stimulating, but they're energetically subtle, energetically stimulating and physically stimulating. Yeah, that really

Andrew Holecek  13:17  
makes so much sense to me. But I want to put an exclamation point, and return to something that you intimated that you also ping on later in your book, connected to this kind of amplification, using these agents as means to heighten awareness and amplifying the mind. And what you said at the end really struck me, because, in fact, I was a student of chugya Trungpa Rinpoche, a statement that I always took from him to be pejorative negative, that LSD is super Samsara. I originally heard that as a negative, your twist on it was fantastically alchemical or tantric, because now you put a positive spin on it, that in a very beautiful way, the super Samsara gives you the opportunity to bring these unconscious processes into the light of awareness. And therefore, I think the word you use is confront, even confrontation, the word you could say inner jihad, right to wrestle with these inner dimensions as a way, again, in the alchemical or tantric spirit, to transform these super Samsara into nirvana through proper relationship. Is that? Is that one way to talk about what you experienced as well?

Chris Bache  14:30  
It is I want to, I want to tag two items there. The first one, again, it all depends on how you meet this super Samsara. Samsara is very addictive. It's very distracting, it's very alluring. And if you increase the your sensitivity to Samsara, it can take you on a journey that just will just distract you and lead you, and it really doesn't take you anywhere. Accept through into more Samsara. But if you use this opportunity in a true contemplative fashion to look deeply at the Samsara that's there, then you you find that you the Samsara will fall apart. You, when really take the samsaric tendencies to their roots, and when you take them to their roots, they become uprooted, and you begin to move into deeper levels, deeper levels of Samsara, but then eventually into the levels that go beyond Samsara, into extra Samsara levels of reality, into the Bardo, but then eventually into extra Samsara levels of reality. Now I want to the second point I want to mention is people use psychedelics for many different purposes, some for recreation, some to hyper stimulate creativity. But three basic purposes are therapeutic healing, which is the dominant way that people are using psychedelics today in the psychedelic Renaissance, to heal the wounds of life, of the personal psyche, second for spiritual realization to accelerate one's awakening, to accelerate the one's awareness of Nirvana, or entering into the condition of nirvana. And this is why I had started. This is what got me started, like many people in the late 70s, into the psychedelic work, but eventually, very quickly, really, that agenda fell away in my practice, partly because of the very powerful protocol that I adopted. Personal enlightenment fell away as not a significant part of my journey, it came back around in the end, and it was always there, but it wasn't the primary modality, collective awakening became very important that is working on behalf of the human family. The Bodhisattva vow, in a sense, came through very strongly. But eventually my work settled into a third agenda, which I would call cosmological exploration. The what my work became was a long journey into what I think of as the consciousness of the universe, or the consciousness of the creative intelligence that's behind the universe and within the universe, and you don't need to explore all those deep pathways in order to awaken spiritually. You don't need to go into archetype of reality. You don't need to go back to the birth of the universe in order to awaken to the truth of your essential nature, as the Buddhist would say, or to your Christ consciousness, as the Christians would say. And so I wanted to differentiate cosmological exploration from the project of spiritual awakening, because if we hold cosmological exploration to the measures or criteria of success of spiritual awakening, I think we're going to miss the mark of what's actually taking place in the journey.

Andrew Holecek  18:05  
Oh my gosh, Chris boy, you're going to the deep end of the pool. Yeah. Wow. So let's unpack this, because I think this is really interesting. This is super important, in my opinion, because it begs a number of questions. One, is the relationship between, excuse me, the individual and the collective, the individual and the cosmos. And therefore, deep, as a scholar of religion and philosophy, deep questions about the nature of mind and reality that I guess, to paraphrase it, there's so many ways to get into this, but 111, question that comes to mind is, is it, in fact, the mind that's in the universe or the universe that's in the mind? In other words, what exactly is the relationship between the individual and the cosmic? And is, in fact, part of what I hear is a dissonance, potential. Dissonance, for me, is a, is a subtle cosmological dualism that there therefore seems to intimate a difference between the individual and the cosmic, that there's still some sense of separation implied there. So maybe help me understand that tease that apart for me, because if I noticed in one of your footnotes, you talk that if you were to pin yourself into a corner philosophically, you would, you would define yourself as a monist. And so how does monism play into this if, in fact, you're intimating a subtle dualism?

Chris Bache  19:32  
It's only a functional dualism which all monist traditions recognize. Fun at Quora. I'm a monist at heart. And this comes this not a philosophical position, it's an experiential position.

Chris Bache  19:52  
The deeper one goes into one's own consciousness eventually come to that point where, where let. Let me, let me back up and start again. Contemporary thought, scientific thought, tends to see the physical world as the only world that exists. And they tend to see the physical world as operating by mechanistic processes, that there is not consciousness in atomic in chemical processes, and that consciousness somehow pops into existence at some point in the evolutionary process. Now there are lots of philosophical reasons for challenging the adequacy of that understanding of consciousness, and I align with those philosophers who are panpsychists who believe that consciousness, or the what you might think of as or consciousness, a core origin, consciousness is present in physical reality or energetic reality from the very start, and that conscious consciousness isn't added later, but consciousness is part of the emerging universe from the Big Bang forward. So that just mark that okay experientially, when one, when one shatters one's personal mind, when when one reaches the limits where your personal history can no longer contain what's happening in your mind. And when you've excavated through the various levels of your personal unconscious, one drops into a larger field of consciousness. Part of that one of the part of the field you drop into is the field of your species mind. And here's the common ground with Carl Jung the collective psyche. But if you keep working and dropping and dropping and dropping you deep, it drop into deeper and deeper, larger and larger levels of consciousness until eventually you're in very familiar, very territory that's very familiar to the mystics. When they are talking about God consciousness are talking about all as one. The experience over and over again, is that the entire universe, both its physical manifestation and it's the mind that underlies this manifestation is fundamentally a single organism, and that all life takes place within this single singularity, and all life is a manifestation of an emergence of this singularity in diversity. And when we first began to discover this underlying reality, what I would call the mother universe that underlies the daughter universe of the physical world during the Axial Age, you know, about three to 5000 years ago, it was so what we encountered, where we began to get, have the the meditation techniques, or the psychedelic techniques in the early Hindu Soma, to Drop into this reality. It was so intoxicating and so ecstasy filled, that we developed an interpretation of life that said that the purpose, the purpose of life was to get back to that, that there is nothing worth holding on to in physical reality. There is nothing worth holding on to in individuality, what you really want to do is take the drop and put it back into the ocean. You want to dissolve ego and end up in back into the oneness. And I understand that, but I think it's a fundamentally flawed cosmology. Now that we're beginning to understand how old the universe, how big it is, how intelligent it is, how how long it's been working to bring forward the more evolved forms of life that it has to think that after 13 point 7 billion years of evolution, when just a Few 1000 years ago, we've become self conscious enough to be able to penetrate our individual consciousness and discover this underlying cosmic, cosmic consciousness, which holds the entire universe, just when we discover that, then we want to dissolve and disappear out of existence altogether, home. Makes no sense. I don't think that's and what I've learned, or what I've been taught in my sessions, is that the universe wants to support individuality, not the prism, not not the individuality that's imprisoned within solitary, egoic awareness, but a robust individuality of what we might call the soul, which is open and porous and in constant exchange with the larger rhythms of life. This is the both and position that when one awaken spiritually, one literally becomes more. More of an individual than you were before you awakened, you know. So there's a, so there is a, I think that when we go deep, we not only discover the oneness, and we discover that that oneness is the essence of our individual being. Classic Atman is Brahman. The essence of the individual is the essence of the totality. But now we discover that Brahman delights in manifesting Atman and in growing Atman, and in Atman waking up to its own true nature, and then that waking up is just a stage in a larger evolutionary process of empowerment so that we literally learn to become more and more and more of a conscious synthesis of individuality and spiritual totality.

Andrew Holecek  25:58  
Oh, Chris, oh my gosh. I can hardly contain myself here. What I mean? Talk about diamonds from heaven. I mean, this is your journey. You're not Johnny Appleseed. You're You're Johnny diamond. See, your life is throwing diamonds. But let me just maybe this is an issue of semantics and the nuance of talking. Yeah, what a challenge when you start talking about Non-duality, nature of mind and reality using dualistic mechanisms, you're headed into trouble. So but help me understand a couple things when, when you talk about the universe, wants to support and there are other intimations in your in your book, that I found really compelling, how it is that you felt from day one, that there was a larger intelligence that was guiding your journey, that you felt held by the beloved. And remind me to come back to this, because I want to share a personal story about my own retreat time where this, this came into real dissonance with me as a practicing Buddhist, because, as you know, on the Buddhist tradition, their biggest, one of the biggest teachings, is on emptiness, non theism and that sort of thing. And so I'm wrestling a little bit with reconciling things like non theism and emptiness with what you're talking about. So to be a little more articulate about this, let's be point a little bit more paint point blank. From my end, how do you reconcile man theism, with this notion of Universal Intelligence, which almost seems to intimate a creator principle, a God, if we dare say, because you almost seem to be implying that there is a divine trans human intelligence, God, whatever term you want to pen to it, that somehow is, in fact, your beloved that is holding you, guiding you and nurturing you. How do you reconcile that with the teachings on emptiness and non theism?

Chris Bache  27:56  
Yeah, it's really not difficult when you when you move into it. So let's focus on the Buddhist teaching of anata, no self, emptiness of self. Shunyata trans, which can also be trans, translated transparency. I think I really endorse the Buddhist position of its radical agnosticism. I think it's an anti theism. So basically, it's a critique that says every theism which is being proposed or has been proposed has structural flaws to it that it so the concept of God, the concept of theism is critiqued as being inadequate, and in its place, Buddhism proposes a pure process understanding of reality, that everything is dynamic, everything is constantly changing. Everything is fluid. Everything is in process. There is no thing which holds its existence by itself. You only exist in the interplay of the whole ocean of causality, of karmic forces, cosmic, down to species, down to individual. It's all an open system. And when you when you wake up to your essential nature, you don't. You don't wake up to a separate thing. You wake up to a fluid process, and you breathe. Now, the fluid process of existence, I take that to heart, and that resonates with my experience, in that every I experienced myself as constantly being guided and instructed and tutored in my psychedelic sessions. But the nature of that consciousness that held me and broke me down and and opened me and then broke me down some more, the nature of that consciousness never revealed itself. As a being, as a person, as a personality, and the very structure of what it was that I was engaging kept expanding and changing. Now in psychedelic states, you don't learn, or you learn by becoming what it is that you're trying to learn about. You don't take the ego there and have an experience of something. You literally shatter and you dissolve and become this. So my experience was that when I began to become aware of this, this other that was holding me and guiding me, and I began to ask it, who are you? What are you? I experienced a death which then dissolved me into a deeper level of reality where I discovered that I was this was myself. It was a deeper level of quote, myself, not my personal self, capital M. And this repeated itself over and over and over for hours on this one particular session, until eventually it brought me into the realization that it's an endless progression. It's it's a seamless consciousness within this vast consciousness. We are an individual consciousness confronting an infinite consciousness. How we experience ourselves at the moment of contact, as we dissolve into it, influence what arises out of this infinite consciousness. And that's that awareness, that this consciousness that I was engaging and discovered myself to be part of was truly infinite and open ended, and that I reached a point 15 years into the journey where I discovered I would never reach the end of it. It was an infinite progression. No matter how many years I did this work, there was always more to discover. So that means, and that, to me, resonates very deeply with the Buddhist position on its critique of theism, its critique of gods that have physical forms of the critique of gods that are come out of human history and that are we can understand to be partial approximations, attempts to understand something which are partially adequate and radically inadequate at the same time. You know so when you move beyond individual consciousness and move into the collective psyche and begin to engage some of the dynamics of the collective psyche. Part of what you engage are all the stories that we've been telling ourselves for 10s of 1000s of years, all the values that have been involved in these stories, which have been reinforcing themselves on all these cultural traditions. And there comes a point where you die out of the collective psyche, just as earlier you had died out of your personal psyche. And when you die out of the collective psyche, you move into a states of awareness which are trans species, which are go far beyond the entire human history. And at that point, you're moving into states of awareness that are radically, radically beyond and clear than any states of consciousness that take place within the collective psyche. And you just you realize that all the stories of our religions are part of the collective psyche story, and that there are the realities far, far, far beyond any of those realities. And I think that Buddhism is pointing to that phenomena. When it says it's fundamentally agnostic, it says you shouldn't restrict yourself to any limiting belief about God. However, you can experience the reality that we're pointing to. We can experience this reality, but our understanding of it will always be partial and fragmented.

Andrew Holecek  34:14  
Oh, my goodness. So geez, every one of these little snippets brought off for a couple hours on this. Yeah, there are a couple of things here that really stood out for me, Chris and again, there's, there's, these are really seed syllables for massive arenas of for conversation. But one is, is what you talk about so beautifully in your book. And I have not read living classroom yet, but I literally just got it in the mail, and that is this radical, revolutionary new pedagogical approach, which you talk about, and I love it. This, this transition from kind of Newtonian, atomistic pedagogy, individuality, separate from others, to kind of a quantum entangled pedagogy where using that mixing metaphor is the connective tissue of consciousness that you're really. So you're learning by becoming I mean, what a fantastic thing to say, which, by the way, has resonance in both the Hindu and Buddhist traditions through what my language is the Gnostic pedagogical approach of hearing, contemplating, meditating, which is ingest, digest, metabolize, until the teachings actually are purified, filtered from conceptual defilements into full somatic empowerment, embodiment, and there that's where true knowing comes from. And so I love that aspect of your journey, that that it introduces a type of pedagogy that is completely resonant with the classic wisdom traditions. You experience this through your journey, I also want to come back to and this is key to me, and this was a really, really big experience for me when I did my three year retreat where I experienced what you're referring to for the first time in my life, and I wrestled with it, Chris, because it really at that time, it wasn't dissonance with my obviously limited understanding of emptiness and non theism, where I did feel I was being held and loved by something bigger than me. And this really created a rut for me, because it was like, Hey, wait a second. I thought there was no externality. I thought it was all solipsist. You know, it's not solipsistic, but it's just mind only. So how, how can there be an external agency without capitulating to the god principle? And so what I want to share with you, that, again, your book was such an inspiration for me, is that, in a very real way, when I was doing these guru yogas and devotional practices properly, my mind broke. I died to a limited self sense I had, you know, we can come back to this in a little bit. There's just tremendous hardship and pain before that breakthrough occurred, and then the minute that happened, I felt this complete container, mandala, holding environment of love and, dare I say, and this is in quotations, an external agency that was, in fact, holding me. And then what became unbelievably interesting to me, Chris was, in a certain way, in the third year of my retreat, I lost something. I lost some of these initial qualities. And so it first, it was like, Wait a second, I Where did my magical nature of mine go and, and I was, I really entered a kind of a dark night of the soul within my three year retreat. And a lama came in and said something that just floored me, that it was a female Lama that said the dakinis can bestow awakening, and they can take it away. And, and I said,

Unknown Speaker  37:39  
What? What

Andrew Holecek  37:41  
like that was like, you know, it was like a big Bong just hit my head. But it was so true, it felt like somehow it had been taken away. And it took me decades, Chris, to finally understand the really brutal, painful, powerful lesson that was developing in my retreat. And you mentioned this a little bit in the very last chapter of your book, which I thought was just absolutely genius, that I was getting stuck in a kind of almost spiritual bypassing, or Transcendentalism, in the negative sense, that I was dissolving into these completely formless realms where I became the universe. And I realized, on one level, when this agency, for lack of a better term, took it away the and this is my thought bubble, probably akin to some of the thought bubbles that entered you. It was like the command was, you will find me in form, or you will not find me at all. In other words, it was almost as if don't get stuck on this formless stuff. Don't get stuck in the transcendental aspect. Come back to the earth. Come back to the imminent, come back into body. And that turned out to be one of the most radically challenging. And eventually, over 20 years of trying to incorporate that revelatory experiences of the retreat was that, no, it's not about this ascent into this fundamental Godhead. That's just half the journey. The other half, the evolutionary half, is taking that and bringing it riveting, it molding it back into the earth. And so I want to pause just to share that story with you, because when you share that in your book, it was like, Oh my gosh, this is exactly resonant with what happened in my own experience. And so I want to return to, if you don't mind, help me further understand, and this will help many of my listeners, who are Buddhists, who really work in the realm of non theism and emptiness, this so called agency, the beloved, that, in fact, can embrace, that we can call on, that we can work with, that we really are not alone. We can take refuge in these greater forces to help us along our path. So sorry for the long winded interjection, but I want to because I appreciate very powerful my own experience, not just a theoretical thing. This is a big deal in my own practice life.

Chris Bache  39:52  
Yeah, you know, maybe it's a footnote to my. Earlier comment to bridge into this new wing. I think Sri Aurobindo critique of Buddhism is correct in that he he criticizes Buddhism for not sufficiently confronting the fact of existence, the the extraordinary power and majesty of existence in in rejecting anything static and anything in form, in its agnosticism, in its anti theism. And it's I'm not taught teaching all of that as well and good. But he says, We have to come to Terence with the fact of the magnitude and the genius and the majesty of the universe of which we are part. Now Buddhism may say, well, thank you very much. We don't need that. What we really need is freedom from our suffering. I'll take the freedom from suffering, and I'm not going to engage in the metaphysical quote speculation and our bend those responses. It's not an either or, and it's a certain kind of a capitulation to not confront some of the magnitude of the breath of life. And I think that now to move more towards what you were describing, I mean

Chris Bache  41:26  
when we have these breakthroughs, when we do the work and we go through the purification processes, and we face our shortcomings, and we let go, and we let go, and we immerse ourselves deeper and deeper, and then when we have these melting experiences, where, as you say, we are embraced, we are held by orders of of genius and orders of love beyond anything we had ever experienced before. And one can go deeper into that, there's there's, I've learned that there's so many levels of oneness. And there's even levels of of of the void, of the fertile void, though that seems like a contradiction. There are levels of that, and you can go deeper and deeper into that. And it feels initially like an external or an other because it wasn't there before, or we didn't experience it before, but we do now, and it's it clearly is not inside of us. It feels outside of us because it's holding us. But the more sorry I'm having something peeping off back here, it's okay. It's all good. The more you go back and forth into that condition and back out again and into it and press it, of course, the more you realize that you're just waking up to your own nature. You're awake because your nature and this universal nature is the same nature that our essential nature is this vast expanse, this love that floods us from outside is actually a love which is welling up also from with inside. The challenges is stabilizing those insights and bringing them into our daily experience. Now I think this is a this is a challenge of all spiritual practice. Of course, we go on these long retreats, we get into subtle, subtle territories. We come back to the honking horns, and it's just it's so difficult to hold on and to integrate day to day. And this is particularly the case, I think, in psychedelic practice, whether you're using psychedelics as a spiritual practice, or whether you're using psychedelics, as I did, as a measure aiming at cosmological exploration. Because in my experience, in what I did, I think I pushed myself far, far deeper into the consciousness of the universe than I could ever, ever internalize and stabilize in this lifetime. And I came to realize during my time, after I came off the mountain, after I stopped my work when I was beginning to kind of just come off the mountain, come away from that long period of practice that I had, I had created an imbalance, an unwitting imbalance. I thought that because I had integrated each session thoroughly and carefully and conscientiously, that I could step back from my sessions and I could take all these blessings with me. And I learned that I had basically leaned so heavily into Transcendence that I had sort of lost my foothold in imminence. And I knew from my experience. Experience is that the entire universe was the body of divine are the body of this infinite consciousness. I knew that I was never outside of divine reality, inside physical reality, but I could not hold that awareness. Yet inside physical reality, I know that there are beings who do the Great Beings are always one's guides in these things. But I had, it's kind of like you, I think what, what I was kind of kicked off of the path, kicked off of the mountain by the sessions themselves. I did not know I was ending them. They were being ended. But there came I had these last sessions, which basically let me know that it was time to end. And one of the things I learned in the process of ending is that I had to not expand my consciousness. I had to not alter my consciousness in any way if the states of being that I had experienced in my sessions were ever going to come and awaken fully inside my historical existence. So I had to sit with the shell of my historical existence if I was ever going to fully integrate these vast bliss, domains of ecstatic presence. And I think, I think I did go farther than was good for me, and I have been in a completely different but equally important process since I stopped my sessions, the way the sessions put it, or the way my meditation put it is, there is the dying of discovering, and then the dying of keeping. And I had done the dying of discovery, but now I had to do the dying of keeping, and that's a different process. Wow.

Andrew Holecek  47:00  
I mean, you're stopping my mind with every one of these, so many things here, but a couple things, whoa. So much about this is mind bending. It's really mental yoga, stretching almost to the breaking point. And so a couple questions here is, and I wrestle with this. I mean, your the integrity of your being, Chris, your presence, the clarity of your writing, the elegance of your scholasticism, your academic predispositions and the like, I have to say, have been incredibly important for me to substantiate the veracity of your journey. And I see it with the mobility of simply the way you're presenting yourself. It's like this is the real deal. The real deal, but it is such a mind stretch. And so a couple of things along this beautiful challenge of stretching into the notion of, I love your nomenclature here, psychedelic practice. I've never heard that before. So talk to us a little bit about this revolutionary notion Greek, you know, the skids have been greased by Michael Pollan, James Kingsland, Stan Grof, these amazing predecessors, the shoulders upon which you now stand where you can now silently but radically proclaim the validity of Entheogen, psychedelics as path. So talk a little bit more about the practice of psychedelics, how to work. This is a path. And then to come back to before I forget, parenthetically, the the importance of integration and the danger of disintegration. In other words, were you ever afraid of going insane, that you were stretched beyond your capacities to contain, and instead of stretching, you snap. So again, there's two big noodles thrown there. The first noodles, yeah, the first and I think in many ways, probably the most important, is talk to us about psychedelics as practice and path, and then to come back, maybe a little bit about the process of integration versus disintegration, sanity versus insanity.

Chris Bache  49:07  
Yeah. Well, you know, in different interviews that I've done, I make the point that I've never tripped. People say, you've done 73 trips. I say, No, I've never tripped. I've done sessions. These are therapeutically focused sessions. But actually, I'm in my own mind, I think of the Japanese term sashin. The sashin is a meditation retreat. It's a period of time set aside for spiritual, intense spiritual practice. So when I talk about LSD sessions, I could be talking about LSD sashin. It is a period of time set aside for therapeutic work, for spiritual work, for cosmological work. And there are certain just as in a sashin that. Your daily right? Life changes. You change your schedule, you change your eating you change your sleeping patterns, you change your rhythm. In order to focus and intensify this practice, just as you did when you did your three year retreat, everything changes around this long period of sustained introspection. The same is true in the psychedelic process. The critical the underbelly of using psychedelics as part of a practice of transformation, an organized practice of transformation. The underbelly is that it's temporary. You only have these states for a few hours at a time, and even if you use them diligently, you still only have them for a few hours of a time at a time, which is really the major reason why I stopped. It became too painful for me to keep coming back from these states, until eventually, I made a deal with my beloved, my name for this intelligence, whatever it is, that it would not bring me back into these dimensions again until I could stay it became It was just too painful to come and go. But before you get to that point, you can do a lot of cleaning, you can you do a lot of healing, and you would, you can do a lot of good for other people in that. What happened in my work, after about two and a half years, when I went through this, what Stan calls the perinatal process. And all you go through this, reliving your birth, confronting all the fears of death, confronting the fundamental existential crisis of whether there is any meaning in existence, eventually going to a complete shattering of your individual egoic reality. I thought, Oh, that's great. I've gone through an ego death. It was a shattering experience. Things are going to open up now go into clean sailing, not what happened. What happens that everything cranked up all over again. The suffering got worse, and it expanded for two years of practice into larger and larger levels, 1000s, hundreds of 1000s of people, 1000s and 1000s of years, I had entered the hell realms. And at first I thought this is like a deeper level of ego death. But eventually I came to understand that, no, this was not about me at all. This was not about fundamentally, my personal transformation, on my personal awakening, or even my personal healing. This was about trying to heal some aspect of the collective psyche, that there is an organizational structure, a consciousness, that that is our species consciousness, and all the wounds of history that are left unresolved are not only left unresolved at an individual soul level, but they are left unresolved at the species level. So all the wars we fought, all the terrible things we've done to each other, all the trauma, to the extent that that trauma is not healed, it it resides as unfinished business within the collective psyche. And every spiritual practitioner who goes deeply enough in whatever methodology they're using is given, often an invitation, if they choose to exercise it, to lift some of that suffering, not out of their personal life, but to lift some of that suffering out of the collective psyche, and for reasons that I think are sole choice that became a large part of my work. And I think there's nothing really special here. I mean, this is what any mother who sees a child suffering is going to do if she can do something to try to help that child suffering, to alleviate it. Any father worth his salt is going to try to help a suffering child, if we are given the opportunity, we're going to try to help other people who are in pain. This is just the normal workings of life. So to me,

Chris Bache  54:31  
in fact, it became a mystery to me why the collective suffering stopped, why I wasn't allowed to stay in there anymore, when clearly there's continuing collective suffering in the human psyche. Why was I taken into deeper levels beyond that, levels which are very difficult, very challenging, but they were not involved with collective pain. I'm losing the second.

Andrew Holecek  55:00  
Part of your question that you would ask, yeah, no, happy, happy. To throw it back up, because there's and there's so much richness coming out that's returning to this notion of we circumambulated this but haven't really directed. Talked about if the place of fear and well of integration versus disintegration, did you ever actually fear, especially coming back to the so called real world for your sanity? I mean, did you ever feel you're going to become so unhinged? Because let me just say this very briefly, Chris, one of the things that was profoundly resonant with with your work, and this is what just blew me away, this kind of on one level I've come to see psychedelics is a type of Tantra. And by this, what I mean is, and this has been a radical change in my more conservative nature, being more traditionalist and paying homage again. There's tremendous genius to the power of tradition. But there are also some near enemies, ossification, redefining even the tradition itself losing tributaries of new information and growth. And so I used to be really somewhat disdainful of these kind of psychedelic approaches. Is chemical mysticism in the pejorative sense, these kind of cheap fixes. But I've really changed my tune in that I now see them as a type of Tantra. By that, what I mean is that in Tantra, body is as important as mind. And now we're talking about body, very subtle body. We're talking about chemical body. We're talking about body at the level of neuro chemistry, basically. And so I think again, within the context of psychedelics as practice and path, it actually can fit in an expanded rubric of Tantra, where body, in this case, chemistry, is as important as the mind that is evoked. And this kind of neuro pharma, phenologic, neuro phenomenological way to use the neuro end to bring about these phenomenal states. And so with that in mind, yeah, the question was the role of fear, fear and integration versus disintegration, and how that relates to your ability to contain this information

Chris Bache  57:11  
you I had, I did come into places to go through A Death-Rebirth cycle is always an ordeal at one level or another. It always involves a surrender to the unknown. It always involves yielding to a certain fear that's holding your system locked in place. And there were places where at advanced stages of the game that I truly did fear for my sanity, or at least I knew that I was going someplace that was completely beyond anything which I could hold on to. I could not hold on to sanity as I had known it. And it was like going over a waterfall, and you just but once you go through that, once you go over that waterfall, and you experience that death, and you experience waking up in a new reality as a new being, a new kind of being, not only a new and improved you, but a different kind of being, where, for hours at a time, you can experience the universe as it experiences itself completely beyond any human right frame of reference once you experience it. That is the nature of the cycle. And this is one of the great gifts that I got from Stan Grof, was the absolute conviction that if you let these experiences take you wherever they want to take you, even though you don't understand them, even though you don't understand why it's happening this way, and it's extremely painful. If you surrender completely, it will always take you through a crisis, and it'll catch you on the other side, and it will receive you, and there, there is a blessing waiting for you on that other side, and for me, coming back from a session, it's never I have no trauma from any of my psychedelic history. I can listen to the music I used and even the most horrifying aspects of the journey, and I love it. I'm completely comfortable with it. I can talk about any of the difficult portions without any resonating, any trauma, because when you take it all the way through, you complete the cycle. Things get bad. They get worse. They get worse. They get very, very bad. But if you let surrender, it'll take you through to a completion, into ecstasy, and then what you bring back is this entire cycle. You bring back the knowledge that things get bad, but things things get great, and that's the rhythm of death and rebirth. That is the spiral of death and rebirth. Now that doesn't mean and I thought as long as that was going on, I was. Teaches that you know that I was holding everything in balance. What I did find, however, is that other thing we talked about, you can go so far into the ecstasy, you can go so deep into Transcendence that literally learning how to live with your memories becomes a major challenge. So as a spiritual practice, this practice is different from classical spiritual practices, which are much more emphasizing kind of holding on to everything, relatively speaking, holding on to where you go in smaller increments. I have an I have an understanding of how the universe works, but I don't live within that reality on a 24/7 basis. The great beings live within that reality on a 24/7 basis. So being able to, I'm speaking out of my memory, and it's good to have memories of these realities. I mean, I really think that changed my life. But it's one thing to be speaking out of memory. It's another thing to be speaking out of an immediate present, right here, living experience of this reality and learning you can internalize so many profound memories that it literally becomes challenging to live with those memories. They haunt you for the rest of your life, and they haunt you in a good way. They're not. They don't haunt you in any negative way. You literally are haunted by the beauty of the universe, right? And so you just, you try to live it and embodiment as best as you can. Yeah.

Andrew Holecek  1:01:58  
Do you think? Do you think, Chris, one of the things that really struck me was what you just paraphrased, and I have to say, in this part of the book, I struggled with this part of this part of the book, when you were talking about just all the pain, all the hardship, all the death, the unbelievably wrenching section about the dying children, was I was almost too much. And so, yeah, I hung in there, and I'm glad I did, in a certain way, almost metaphoric of you're hanging in there. But is it possible that that perhaps the what was being invited was developing a one taste relationship to both the heaven and the hell, that there would in fact, be no preference and no because that's what they say, allegedly, the very highest stages before the 11th Bhumi, the highest kind of membrane barrier before awakening, is no preference whatsoever for Samsara, nor Nirvana in discovering the inseparability. So do you think on one level that the agency was somehow eliciting the teaching lesson of great equanimity, that, in fact, relate to the agony in the same way you relate to the ecstasy, to realize that there's fundamentally no preference for either that, that that may have been what was being suggested there? Does that resonate with you.

Chris Bache  1:03:22  
I understand the teaching, and that teaching does come up and reflect certain aspects of the journey. I'm not sure that it reflects this particular aspect in a in a satisfying way. I have a different way of understanding because you're talking here about the ocean of what I call the ocean of suffering. And you know, one of the things I describe in the book is insights that came much later in the session, that I don't think everybody has to go into something like the ocean of suffering. I don't think everybody has to go into the hell realms or spend as long in the hell realms as I spent there. I mean, I don't think people need to be afraid of going through what I went through as kind of a necessary part of any kind of spiritual journey or cosmological exploration. I think that this was something that my chose, my soul chose to do before I was born. It manifested so quickly in my sessions after a couple of years, and it was such a tenacious and sustained part of my journey that I came to understand that this was literally a soul's choice. And I say this without pride at all, because I think there are many, many, many beings in the world today who have made the same choice. I think we are living in a critical time in history. We are living in a time when the sin. Of the fathers literally are just pouring out of us. And I don't I quote The biblical passage, not to put this all on men, but that really the limitations of our up to now standard, of our evolutionary standard, are just pouring out of us because we are being challenged to move into our next evolutionary step, not only as individuals, but as the species that the creative intelligence of the universe is trying to awaken not only individual spiritual practitioners, but the game is collective now it's desperately trying to awaken the entire human species and the the hell realms that one are literally manifesting on Earth as part of this collective detoxification process. And I think there are many beings who are have taken the Bodhisattva vow into their life and are working to alleviate suffering, collectively, socially, politically and also psycho spiritually. Because I think this century is different than earlier centuries, because there's a boiling taking place as a there's a there's a turning which is taking place deep within. And so I assume that I knew what I was getting into, and I volunteered for this work, and I know that this it's a hard chapter to read, even though I cut it down to the minimal form, it's difficult material. And yet I've had so many people write me and say, I know exactly what you're talking about, because I've been, I've been going through these experiences for years, or I went through them and I didn't understand them. You've helped me understand them some. But I think it's, it's not an unusual experience, once we understand that what's taking place here is a collective dynamic. It's something that we as an individual may have started, but the universe uses our individual initiative to accomplish something of its purpose of its agenda, and its agenda is to heal the human species in order to clear out the dross that is holding us back, to make more room for the infusion of grace, our energy or awareness that is coming to carry humanity through this crisis that we are coming into. We literally cannot afford to be a planet that's run by egos anymore? Yeah, for sure, we're just killing the planet. We need to be a planet that's run by awakened souls, and by that I mean beings who have a conscious awareness of their history, so that they know that they are not simply egos, separate private cells that they have an awakened soul consciousness where they know themselves to be spiritual beings in dynamic relationship with other spiritual beings, including non human beings. In this world, you know, animal kingdom, and when we wake up in that way, and we discover how old we are and how many generations we've been doing this, and we discover the breadth of our human of our relationships with other beings, then Naturally, we make different choices. We make more inclusive choices. We make choices for the long term, we make choices on that serves the good of all. And right now, I think we desperately need to be making choices that are inclusive and work for the good of all.

Andrew Holecek  1:08:55  
Yeah, that's really beautiful. With your permission, and if you don't want to go here, that's fine. I want to turn again. I have to contain both my enthusiasm and the energy of like, Oh my gosh. We need to talk about that. We need to talk about that. So I'm letting so much slide that it's fantastic. But with your kind permission, I want to turn to this issue of the the scientific and academic elephant in the room. How do we know if anything, any of this is actually true? How do we know issues of replica bill, replicability? I mean, how do we know if, if what you're seeing is idiosyncratic to your own biochemistry, that this and again, in the best sense of the word, not pejorative, this is your trip. Yeah. And how do we know that if seven, if 1000 other people did exactly what you did, that they could even come close to replicating your insights? Or would they, in fact, have their own particular, biological, historical, phenomenological, whatever matrix? Context whereby they would see and write a different journey, a different book, through 20 years of exploration. So the issue here is the problem of proof and universality. What would happen if 1000 people did exactly what you did and they came up with 1000 different visions? I mean, how certain are you that what you're experiencing is actually true, or simply your enculturation, your your own unique biochemistry and all the histories that bring about the narrative that you're sharing with us. So are you okay? Okay, going in this direction?

Chris Bache  1:10:33  
Absolutely, that's a really important question. I mean, that's like a foundational question, because if it, if this is only echoes from my own personal psyche, or even echoes from the collective psyche, then it has a certain kind of epistemic value, but it doesn't really have sufficient epistemic value that we that warrants our attention. And I discussed this all the way back in dark night, early dawn, in the first chapter, where I'm outlining what it this psychedelic philosophy, and there's a section there called the epistemic warrant of psychedelic experience, where I flesh out this question and look at what the issues are involved In this, in questioning whether these experiences truly do have epistemic value. So that's I just point there. Also Ken ring and I have had a dialog about this. Ken is good friend, wonderful researcher near death. Episode, I used his books for years in my classes. He challenged me on the same questions, and we did a dialog. Eventually we published it in I'm blanking on where it is. I should have this at the tip of my tongue, it's online. Yeah, it's online. It's quite the essay. Is our deep psychedelic experiences trustable? Yeah, and if it were just my experiences, that would be one thing. But here's, I think, the great value of Stan Grof work, where Stan Grof has collected psychedelic experiences from hundreds, if not 1000s of people over decades, and he's integrated them into a certain model of what happens at different stages of the journey. My experiences fit squarely within the broader phenomenological discussion of experiences that he has already outlined. And so I think that he provides, in a sense, a broad epistemic warrant for look, taking seriously my maybe a little unusually intense, or maybe a little unusually deep my experiences. But there's not too much new here. When you look at the full breadth of experiences that he's reported in his many, many books, culminating in his great master work, the way of the psychonaut. So there's a deep, you know, overlap. There another point, I think I'm thinking of Michael sabhm, who was a cardiologist in the early days of the near death episode movement, and he was very upset that people were talking about coming back from a cardiac arrest and talking about spiritual realities. He didn't believe in any of that stuff, and he was going to systematically disprove it. And he eventually wrote a book in which he came to the conclusion this stuff is real, and he differentiate between what he calls the local event and the transcendent event that when somebody has is in surgery or has a cardiac arrest, they get out of that they have a sensation of getting out of their body, and they can experience what's going on in the local arena, the surgical theater, the waiting room down the hall, the hospital, what's going On in the parking lot outside, and then they go into the light, and they leave physical reality, and they go into a transcendental reality. He says, We can't evaluate the transcendent experience that they have, but we can evaluate the accuracy of their local experience, and that's what he tries to do whether what they think they experience locally is, in fact, verified, verifiable in that world. And he provided evidence that in fact it was. Now that doesn't prove that the transcendent experience is true, but it certainly increases the credibility that if it's the local experience is true, the Transcendence experiences gets a little bit more little boost of credibility. The same thing happens in psychedelic experiences. Many psychedelic experiences are such that they can be verified information about the conditions of birth or circumstances of birth, the things that people learn that they really. We can reasonably exclude the possibility that they had learned through natural means, and yet, it turns out that these things can be validated. That plays here. The other part, though, is, I think, cross validation, other people having similar experience,

Andrew Holecek  1:15:18  
communal confirmation, exactly now,

Chris Bache  1:15:21  
what we find is this, when people start working with psychedelics, if you took 100 people from 100 different backgrounds, different socio cultural backgrounds, different trainings and whatnot, they would have very different experiences, because psychedelics, or LSD, is an amplifier. It doesn't take you to a particular experience that amplifies your mind. And because we have different histories, we come in contact with different experiences. However, Stan reports that when people go through the perinatal Death-Rebirth process, our experiences get very, very concentrated and very standardized, we begin to deal with issues which are not idiosyncratic, but are universal, fundamental existential issues, and that when people navigate the Death-Rebirth experience, every person that he has experienced who goes through that process comes back with a an understanding of spiritual reality, which is fundamentally compatible with each other, that there is a spiritual world that was waiting for us and receives us from then it's a matter of evaluating our individual explorations of that spiritual world. Now, what I did in my first in my first book on psychedelics, near dark night, early dawn, I put together three areas of inquiry, psychedelic research, near death episode research and out of body research, particularly the work of Robert Monroe, founder of the Monroe Institute of Applied Science, author of three books exploring the out of body state. And I asked whether these cosmology is that emerge from these separate bodies of exploration, out of body research, near death episode research, psychedelic research, are their cosmological visions diverging, or are they converging? And once you look at them carefully, they are converging. They are clearly converging. So that's addressing the question Are, are these experiences trustworthy? Now, in my dialog with Ken ring, I present other reasons why I think they're trustworthy, and that is for every time I had my own cultural expectations fulfilled, because I'm educated in world religions, I'm educated in comparative spirituality, I have an understanding of certain of these things, but for every time I've had them confirmed, I've also had more experiences that that shatter my expectations. I learned things I was not expecting. I learned an understanding of reincarnation, how reincarnation works, and where it's taking us that I was not expecting at all. I wasn't expecting anything about the birth of the future human. There was nothing about my conditioning, which led me to think that humanity was coming into this crossroads. There were so many things that I was shown so consistently that were far and beyond anything that I had personally expected, that I think one can reasonably conclude that this is a confrontation with truly an independent reality. And I mean independent, I have to qualify that, but a reality that it was not simply echoing back to me, my own expectations. And if you study the work of other people who push deeply into these conditions, into these states, I think we find a fundamental convergence, which doesn't mean we're seeing the exact same thing. But the issue is, do our do our visions overlap? Are they coherent with each other? Do they overlap? Now, clearly we're only at the very early stages of this inquiry. What's important is not any one person's experience. What's important is when we get, if we were to be able to get a standardized protocol, take 100 people, 1000 people with some type of standardized protocol, with very, very different backgrounds, and put them through the same regimen of internal, introspective work, then we get all of their testimony, all of their experiences, put them all on the table, and begin to look at, what is it that's consistent and what is idiosyncratic? That's where, where we're going. We're just are not there yet. We're only at the very early stages. So I have no doubt that some of the things may be somewhat idiosyncratic to me. But. I think that when we get to that point where we have hundreds of people putting their testimony forward, we're going to find much more consistency and overlap than we find divergence.

Andrew Holecek  1:20:13  
Oh, my goodness. So so so many things here as well. What a beautiful answer. Crystal really the difference between correspondence epistemology and coherence. Epistemology, I mean, the truth is born of coherence is the type of knowing that you're alluding to here. But this begs the question of aspirations around this. And so pardon the tongue in cheek reference here. But I was this came to me out of who knows where, where you know, where do you see yourself in 20 years? Do you see yourself and again? If you don't want to go here, fine, but how do you see yourself? Are you a shaman for our age? Do you see yourself? And this is where the play on Word comes in, not establishing the church of LDS, but the church of LSD, right? So do you see yourself? Not the Latter Day Saints, but you know LSD. So do you see yourself? Do you see yourself? And I think you understand the heart of my question, founding a church where, in fact, you know you have a place where you can, you now can create, as a visionary, as a revolutionary, a holding environment, a mandala container that can allow future Psychonauts to actually embrace this as path, because otherwise, where is this going to go? Are you just a unique and really interesting blip, or is are you portending the possibility of really creating a tradition of Psychonauts using rigorous to whatever extent they can, methodologies, frameworks? I think you see where I'm coming from here. You know what's next in terms of people say, somebody comes to you and says, Chris, I'm so blown away by your book. I want to take psychedelics as a practice. I want to create this as a path. What do I do? Where do I go?

Chris Bache  1:22:09  
Well, the first thing I tell that person always is, please, don't do what I did. Do it gently. Be gentler. Be more careful. I think I'm a symptom of a cultural pivot that we're making. I don't think I'm important, and as we make this cultural pivot, I think I will just sort of disappear under the wave of history as a somewhat early explorer. But I think we are making a pivot that's going to include and is embracing the value of psychedelics now, right now, you know, we basically did about 25 years of this work, and then in 1970 6970, it was all made illegal. Then we went into this long dry period until 2014 when Scientific American published an editorial basically on the front page of that saying that it's time to let scientists determine, not politicians determine whether psychedelics have therapeutic value. So right now, there's this tremendous Renaissance taking place. Universities all over the world are studying psychedelics, are establishing centers for studying psychedelics. A tremendous explosion. We're starting where we started back in the 1950s exploring these potentials for healing the personal psyche. We're looking at post traumatic stress, healing addiction, healing death anxiety, healing depression. We're really focused on using these substances in therapeutic applications and under control scientific conditions. And this is, and that's perfectly where we ought to be. We need to now that we've started this inquiry again, we need to be very rigorous, establish the protocols, do the documentation, look at the brain wave pictures, so on and so forth. Sooner or later, however, we're going to discover the same thing we discovered far back, and I'm not talking about the popular 60s psychedelic movement, though that too. But the serious researchers, the Stan Grof and that early generations Ralph Meister, that generation of researchers, discovered that these substances have philosophical value, not just psychotherapeutic value. They give us entire insights into the structure of the deep psyche. They can even give us insights into the structure of the cosmos, into the structure of the cosmology of the mind. And if we take PhDs who have people who have PhDs in physics and astronomer they can. Literally come back with deeper insights into the realities that they are, that they are educated to understand. I often have wished that I had PhDs in astronomy and physics, because then I would be able to understand so much more than I was able to understand given the background that I had in humanities. We're making this pivot, I think that just as psychotherapists are creating all sorts of creative protocols for exploiting the therapeutic potential of these substances, it's only going to be a matter of time before we develop philosophical protocols which for systematically exploring these states of consciousness, going into them in a rigorous manner, coming back, recording them, evaluating them, looking at our experiences in the in a social context for social validation, or asking that question, embodying putting our experiences in the context of other bodies of knowledge looking at how these experiences correlate to quantum physics, for example, or correlate to super string theory. I think this is, this is not me. I'm going to be gone 20 years. Hell, I won't be around in 20 years. I don't think I'll be around nearly that long. I'll be gone and and actually and two, I should say it took me a long time to even be willing to share these experiences, because I know how upsetting or controversial they are. I literally thought of writing the book and letting it be published post human, yeah, exactly, because I didn't want to deal with the fall out of it. And I think what happened with

Andrew Holecek  1:26:47  
Wolfgang Pauli in his conversations with Carl Jung, right? He didn't want any of that revealed until after he died. But anyway, I'm sorry. I didn't mean to

Chris Bache  1:26:53  
cut, yeah, and I just, I thought, but you know, the mother told me, said, No, you can't do that. She said, she said this, we need all oars in the water. She said, You didn't give yourself these visions. We gave you those visions, and they were never given to you for your private edification. You were holding these visions in trust, and that she wanted me to share them, not because it's not important that they're my visions. She wanted me to share them because they would support other people in their spiritual practice, other people in their social work, to help us through this very, very intense time of history that we're coming into, all hands on deck. And so I did the book, and I don't have any I don't have any agenda. I think what's what's clear is that there is a social pivot taking place, and that's what's important as we move forward collectively, the work, which is being done in graduate programs and medical schools all over the country. That's what's important. I think I'm a little bit ahead of the curve in terms of the philosophical discovery only because of the very, very intense methodology that I used. But I don't think I'm really that far ahead of the curve. There is a professor from Southern Methodist University called Bill Barnard, who's written two fantastic books, one on William James and one on Henri Bergson, a fine academic, Bill Barnard and he's publishing a book from Columbia University Press this year called liquid light, Which basically is a philosopher's reflections on his extended experiences with Ayahuasca and living with the Sante Daime community in Brazil. Beautiful book, magnificent book, and symptomatic one more academic who's willing to go public on their psychedelic experiences and not simply recording them and saying all this is, you know what's important, but evaluating them critically, digesting them and offering them as part of a ongoing historical discussion. So we're making this pivot. It's, it's happening,

Andrew Holecek  1:29:12  
and it's, it's radically brave. Chris, I want to acknowledge your bravery on this. And again, this is a stretch for for me, because I'm being introduced, over the last couple of years to how conservative I am. In some levels, I always thought myself as this liberal, far out kind of guy, but I realized, in my own way, I have my, I wouldn't say, blind spots, but natures of being conservative that that really know, being challenged stretched open and going, Wow, this is fantastic. And one of these is the just the generous courage of writing a book like this, because you know this from the traditional admonitions, He who knows does not speak, He who speaks does not know. And so here you are. You're speaking all over the place, and I used to really question it. And then, you know. The beautiful book by me. Je Rinpoche, if you haven't read it, in love with the world amongst journey through the Bardo life and death. It's an amazing journey of his intimate sharing that is profoundly inspiring. Your book. Vi, in certain sense, violates the code of secrecy, but I think we're living in unusual times that require unusual slash extreme measures. And so I, for one, really applaud your courage that you are you are stretching the boundaries in so many levels, in terms of pedagogy, radical innovations and path and also courage and sharing. And so you were about to say something, I want to return to what you're about to say, but I really deeply thank you for that, because the other tradition, to Kuhn Rinpoche said sharing experiences inappropriately, and that's the key, is like being in a dark cave with a candle and giving your candle away, you're left in the dark. Opportunity is transformed into obstacle. And so I this is both an applause for what you're doing and perhaps a commentary elicited from you in terms of inviting more and more of the sharing so that people can realize there is a chorus of sanity coming out. Yeah, radical, innovative, innovative ways of learning.

Chris Bache  1:31:15  
So yeah, I had to really face resistance around that too, because Buddhism, traditionally, you don't talk about your experiences. You know, you really don't talk. It can become an encumbrance on you to talk about your experiences. But you know, I'm a teacher. I love to teach. I was designed to teach. I'm a yacker. I I love to, yeah, you know, I just, that's what I love to do. And as I said at the in that coming off the mountain chapter, it wasn't simply the imbalance of toward Transcendence which made me sick coming off the mountain. It was the silence that I had to live with, because, as a philosopher of religion, I had had the most powerful philosophical experiences of my life, and I wasn't allowed to talk about them. I wasn't allowed to share with them. I wasn't allowed to do my job, which and to do my job as an academic, because of our phobia, our laws around psychedelics and that holding that information literally makes you sick inside. You know I wasn't allowed to be who I truly am, and writing the book was part of my own self healing, and beginning to speak about it is part of my own self healing. And at the same time, having said that, I have no agenda whatsoever. I I'm not. I have no I'm not trying to persuade anybody. I don't have an ax to grind. I've got nothing to sell. I'm I'm an old man. You know, I'm 72 years old. The end of the diving board is getting close. Thank goodness. This being that I am is so ephemeral, is so short lived. I have no attachment to it, and certainly no attachment of using it as a model of anything. But I love to teach, and I hope that the experiences will be useful to other people, even if they never take any psychedelics whatsoever. I hope that the vision of the universe and the vision of the intelligence of the universe will resonate deeply with the people's inner experiences and their cognitive experiences as science becomes more aggressive in pushing its own boundaries, but I hope it will speak to people, whether or not they ever take any psychedelics, because I think we are at a pivot point. We are just we're coming out of this terrible period of history where we believe that there's no intelligence to the universe, that it's all an accident, that it's all a mechanistic rule of the genetic dice, and there's no real intelligence to the existential circumstances that we confront. And I think this is being exploded, and we're waking up and suddenly we're it's like a veil is being lifted. We're waking up to a world in which reincarnation is a fundamental fact of life. It's a fact of nature. We're waking up to to truly an emergent intelligence in the universe, which everywhere we look, whether it's in the solar system, in galaxies, in the genetic code. Everywhere we look, we are seeing orders and orders and orders of intelligence. And this is simply accelerating that immersion into that intelligence, and that opens up a whole new I think this is a pivot point that we're coming into in. And you know, it couldn't happen a minute too soon, because we are about to go extinct if we don't change.

Andrew Holecek  1:35:07  
It really reminds me, Chris, of what the ecology scientists talk about is punctuated equilibrium. Things, simmer, simmer, simmer, simmer, simmer, and then they sudden, flip some certain way. It's like what you said so beautifully in the book that gestation takes a long time. Birth happens quickly. And so when I look at the 50,000 foot view, what I'm seeing here is exactly what you're intimating, that that correlative, like the Taoist say, correlative with the dark, is the emergence of light. And in direct proportion to the insanity, are voices of sanity coming in. And so if we can relate, it's like they say in Tantra, hell is paradise, that the greater the obstacle, the greater the opportunity. And voices like yours and others that are actually coming up in this ocean of tremendous dark edge talk about the Kali Yuga really lend credibility to this CO emergent principle that if we simply look properly, voices like yours and others, where you're just part of a chorus of sanity coming up, just a chorus, and if we see that, then we then we can. It's all about right view, isn't it? Like the Buddha say that if we simply have the right view, that the greater the obstacle, the greater the opportunity, then what you're talking about is adding to that kind of view, and so I don't want to draw too much of your time. I could talk to you for the rest of this day, but with your permission, there's just a few more things that, oh my gosh, I have to ask you sure one is in this is a little bit, I mean, it's philosophical, but it's interesting for most people. And I think this is for you as well. When, when we say, oh, that's just theoretical, that's philosophical, well, it may be so simply because it's not your experience yet, but when it becomes your experience, it's no longer theory, it's no longer philosophy, it's your reality. And so one of the things that you talk about that that again, challenges both Hindu and Buddhist approaches to teleology, purpose on one level, as you know, the Tibetans talk about Leela. The world is just play. The Tibetans talk about Rolpa, just this divine play and dance without directionality, without purpose, and so is it simply a matter of stepping out of binary modes of thinking that is either that or the other and switching to more. What do they call it? Dioletheism. This the ability to hold different views concurrently. I think Jung talked about this as well. So talk to us a little bit about the emerging human which implies purpose, teleology ends the Omega point. I mean, does that fit into your both your experience and your understanding of what you went through?

Chris Bache  1:37:50  
You know, I think when some of the great masters talk about life is leela, life is play. Creation is Leela. It's a dance. I don't think they're saying, of course, in any frivolous way, but I think what they're saying is not necessarily that life doesn't have an intelligence that is expressing itself in purposeful activity, but they're saying that life isn't generated out of compulsion, life is not generated out of necessity, that life comes out of the fullness of being. It comes out of the excess of being. It doesn't come out of a deficit of being. And that there's an exuberant quality to life, and we express this exuberant quality in this metaphor of a dance, because dance is not compelled. We dance out of joy. We dance out of an excess. We don't dance out of necessity. I think the I think when I you know, the theme of the future human, of the emergence of the future human, was a completely unexpected theme in my work, and it was one of the most consistent themes of the work, and it became the context within which everything else took place. And it eventually became the context in which I understood my entire incarnation to be taking place. It started in the 23rd session, and at the last time I encountered it was in the 70th session. It was a consistent thing, and it is. And here I would just suspend any theistic notions of mechanistic intention or purposeful intent or manipulative intent. I don't think in those categories, I would hold onto an emergent understanding of a cosmology that there is an innate quality which is. Emerging, we go through these punctuated equilibriums, this these crisis points and that there is a a genius at work in this which I don't begin to understand. The you know how this works. What I will report is that in my sessions, when I dissolved into this larger intelligence, which existentially, I was part of, but cosmologically, was much larger than anything I could relate to personally. It was It told me a story over and over again, and it laid it out systematically, layer by layer, without contradiction over years that humanity was coming to a turning point. Humanity was approaching a critical time in its evolutionary journey, a true before and after time that there, that the karma of millennia was kind of rushing into this valley. It's like multiple rivers pouring into a canyon. There's nowhere for us to go except up. This is a critical time and that, and it is a time in some way foreseen by the great seers of history, by the great saints, by the great spiritual geniuses of history, the great incarnations, the great prophets, the great awakened ones that they that they have seen this kind of coming forward. It's a vision which is shared by indigenous peoples that we are coming into this time and then 55 sessions, 15 years or so into the work. Now I have to back a bit, time became very porous to me in my work. I mean, I was taken beyond linear time, multiple times, in many different modalities, into what I call deep time. Deep time is not eternity. It's not it's not timelessness. It's experiencing different spans of time from within a different frame of reference. And I was taken into deep time, and I was taken into it, not as Chris Bache, because Chris Bache had been dissolved long before, and I had been dissolved into the human unconscious, into the human species mind. And I don't know whether it was because of the work that I had given in the ocean of suffering, whatever it was I was taken into the future and experienced what I saw, what I experienced as the death and rebirth of humanity, asked the human species a cataclysmic period of history in which humanity was literally just broken down. We lost control. We were we were put through a crushing historical process where all the all the assumptions of the past broke down. We were literally brought to our knees. We were reduced in the end to the challenge of mere survival. It just we were stripped down. It was a terribly excruciating experience, but when it was at its worst, when it was at its peak, it was like a hurricane that passes over a Pacific Island, suddenly, I began to experience it. Things were beginning to get better. Things were beginning we there were many, many people had died, but many survived, and the storm began to pass. We began to pick ourselves up. We began to reconnect, and as we did, when we did, we discovered that we had been changed. This crisis had changed us at our core. We began to enact a living intelligence, an aliveness, that we had discovered in the worst of this crisis. It was like this crisis opened up our hearts and made us a more compassionate species, and it opened up our mind, making us a more intelligent species, able to integrate and access information from the intelligence of the universe itself. As we began to reconnect with each other, we began there was a snowballing effect, so that just as there had been a breaking down and a breaking down and a breaking down, there was an acceleration of creativity, an acceleration of the actualization of values that we had discovered in the worst of this crisis, where everything felt new, everything there was a new set of values, a new set of ideas, a new political reality emerged, a new social reality emerged. Later, I was given more instructions on the mech, some of the mechanisms that are involved, and instructions and teachings on that. This is a shift which is taking place at the center of the collective psyche without going into too many layers of the discussion. Now this is not simply a shift in the political arena or the social arena or economic arena. It is a shift in the core substructure of the human psyche, a shift in the architecture of the collective psyche, and we've been just as we collect all our experiences over many incarnations at the soul level. The human species has been collecting and integrating its experiences at the collective level, at the unconscious, collective psyche level. And what's happening now is that we are pivoted. We're poised to make a pivot in the collective psyche, and that after we make this pivot, all human beings born will be operating within the context of a literally, of a different collective psyche. And I think we see the prototype of this psyche in Christ, in Buddha, in Muhammad, in these awakened beings who we have been trying to emulate for generations and generations, beings with expanded hearts, with expanded compassion, with expanded deeper insights into the universe. They speak differently. They don't work the way ordinary people work. They are different kinds of being, and I think we are becoming a different kind of being, at least. That's the consistent message that comes through my work over and over again.

Andrew Holecek  1:46:51  
It's literally breathtaking. Chris, a few with your confirmation, I have to bring you back at some point, because we haven't, I wouldn't say we haven't gotten to the goodies. Oh my gosh, it's been so rich. Your chapter on the diamond Luminosity blew my socks off. Your chapter on coming from down from the mountain was brought me to tears. I have to bring you back to talk about that, because I don't want to dilute the impact of what you're saying by trying to do a shotgun of I mean, how do you distill 20 years of unbelievable insight to even two hours of conversation? And so to whatever extent I have been able to, I wanted to concentrate on a couple heart essence points. Add a little water to them so we could understand them without capitulating to my near frenetic predisposition to like, oh my gosh, I have to talk to him about this, right?

Chris Bache  1:47:41  
We'd be going, you're doing a great job. You're hitting really important topics.

Andrew Holecek  1:47:46  
We'd be going at this my point, but I wanted there's a couple of things before we close for today that I want to return to, that that I think are somewhat important, at least they are to me. And two things here. One is, your journey seems to imply a type of attainment. In other words, you're alluding to extraordinary states. And I'm not contesting that at all, but I'm wondering if the languaging, the branding, so some of the things that occurred to me, using somewhat marketing methods is one thing that needs to happen is this whole thing needs to be rebranded, this whole LSD thing, the branding thing is really so contaminated with histories that we need to rebrand it as entheogenic practice or whatever. But the other thing that needs perhaps to be rebranded. And this is just me. I'm curious how this lands with you. Is there seems to be this intimation that you have a left conventional reality on what level you have and attain the state that are extraordinary? But is it, in fact, Chris, just as viable, if not more so, to say that this is the extraordinary state. In other words, this is the non ordinary state, Samsara, and that what you're actually doing in your journey is, is, this is a narrative that keeps coming over and over. I loved it, the narrative of opening, receiving, surrendering, and maybe for next time, not only opening the mind, but just as much. Again, in tantric languaging, the unbelievable importance of opening the body and so as a consequence of opening. And you mentioned this so many times, I was curious how often you said this, dropping. You open, you drop. So it's not a journey of ascent, so much as it is a waking down into really. What are ordinary states that that when you relax properly and have the capacity to be so open, what you're talking about is completely ordinary that you're not really going anywhere. You're simply relaxing deeply into the right here and now. And so the reason I say this, Chris is because one thing that they I think could be a little bit intimidating for people, is, Oh, my. Gosh, I can never do that. I could never attain that that's so far removed. I think if, if you look at it in this different way, and I'm curious, if this lands with you, it empowers the immediacy of what you're talking about, that that fundamentally, this is the nature of the mind, this is the nature of the human and even trans human condition. And so talk to us a little bit about the, the the almost the false note, the false notion of path. Because even the notion of path needs to be rebranded here, because that implies you need to go somewhere else. And in the very striving you actually ironically leave what you're trying to attain. Yeah, no, the whole notion of like you attain enlightenment, that's actually an oxymoron. You cannot attain enlightenment. There are mutually exclusive terms, so a lot of noodles against the wall, but I think important ones, because it also ties into the last thing I wanted to say here is you also use the phrase a number of times of coming and going. In other words, you enter the state. You left it, you entered it, you left it. That also means a return to some kind of source. So I'm wondering about the relationship here again. I know I'm tossing a lot out the relationship between source and essence, and the relationship of all this to recognition. That is, in fact, recognition not the central message here that if you simply open your mind and heart, irrespective of the means, meditative, pharmacological or whatever, if you simply open and recognize everything that seems to be intimated here is, oh, geez, I need to do this 20 year journey to attain this. Provisionally, maybe yes, but absolutely no, it's right here right now. You just need to open your eyes, divine eyes, and it's been here all along.

Chris Bache  1:51:47  
Yeah, I absolutely agree with you, in fact. Well, let me back up, and there's a lot there. I'm sorry, yeah, in the early stages of the journey, there is a subjective sense as one moves into psychic level reality and subtle level reality, there is a subjective sense of opening becoming larger, opening and becoming larger. And that's why I think psychedelics were named mind opening. It is a sensation of opening the mind, late in the journey, later at a more advanced stage, when I was working at what Stan would call causal level reality. Yeah, we can as well. Yeah, everything reversed. I had the experience that my mind, everything was converging. I was in very, very large states of consciousness, very, very high energy. But instead of going deeper into those states, all everything was converging back to right here, right now. My my sessions were getting harder to describe because they they were so taking place inside ordinary reality. I wasn't being taken outside. Everything was converging, and I began to think, Oh, my God, have we really misclassified what these substances are. They're not mind openers, they're mind concentrators, absolutely. And I think what happens is, at different levels of reality, the subjective experience changes from opening to a concentration, or it may be the case that the consciousness orchestrating My experience was bringing me back into what would more be recognized as a more classical kind of spiritual awakening. But the core is that it's really simply the case a sashin is you turn your mind and you focused on the present, you eliminate the outside, and you go right here, right now. And when you do that, this purification process happens, of course, but where you end up at the end is simply where you were in the beginning, but with fewer distortions. Yes, Elliot, yeah. And you're just cleaning, you're cleaning the makyo, you're cleaning the distortions. But there's no place to go. There's no place else to go to, except where you already are, and there's nothing to become except what you already are and always have been. You don't you know that reality, which doesn't begin, it doesn't end. There's no turning on, there's no turning off. There is only the relaxing into what has always been right here, right now. And I think that's that is true on at least it was true in my experience in the psychedelic path, I don't think anything that I'm describing is original. I think everything that I've described in the book can be found in the spiritual literature of the mystical traditions, the contemplative traditions. The cosmology that emerges in psychedelic research is not a new cosmology. It's an old cosmology. It's it's only new in the context of its emergence, and it leaves you, I say, you know, in somewhere in the end stages of the book, like the only thing which is of value to me in the psychedelic work is purification, purification and just purification, and it because it brings us into a more intimate experience of what already is. And by some silly nonsense, we keep ourselves out of the joy of this deep and profound reality that is living in us, that is us that is expressing itself. So I absolutely agree with you. I uh, yeah, it's yeah, it's just purifying. That's all.

Andrew Holecek  1:56:08  
And again, the not that this brings validity to what you're saying, other than the validity to my world, is we come and learn and understand things in terms of other things, yeah, technological knowing and so what brought such deep, deep resonance was, wow, here's an amazing individual who's taken an entirely new path that is so resonant with my path, and again, completely aware of the hubris of saying my Path betokens the truth, and therefore yours is true because it relates to mine, right? Subtle self aggrandizement there is actually not so subtle, right? I think your stuff is true because it resonates with my trip, totally aware of that, yeah. But with that said, there's so many resonances the notion of purification as you know you're and this is what the question I wanted to ask you, how, as we start to close up for today, one of the chapters or sections that really spoke to me, of course, somewhat previewed by what I just said was your interjection of the path of Vajrayana, that and how that is now perhaps create, creating a, again, a holding environment to support augment transition in more and this you understand, hopefully, the question in more Organic means more phenomenological versus neurological means, so called traditional methods. And so as we start to wrap up for today, because I want to give people something to take home, like, how can they use this work with this? And I have one follow up there, but what has been the role, and continues to be the role of both meditation and the Vajrayana to augment, support, enhance, stabilize what you've gone through.

Chris Bache  1:58:14  
Well, one of the gifts that came out of my psychedelic experiences was a deepened appreciation of the power and effectiveness of classic spiritual contemplative practices, and including the Vajrayana practices, by becoming sort of temporarily more aware, I was able to appreciate more deeply how these practices were affecting my body and how they were affecting my mind, even though, and they also helped me manage some of the challenges that I was running into, because, remember, I wasn't doing this work, or I didn't end up doing this work for the purpose of spiritual awakening, though that was always there in the background. But I was doing it to explore the universe as a philosopher hungry to explore the nature of reality. But the Vajrayana practices helped me manage the excess of energy that was having was being flowing through my body by giving it an intermediate place to live and breathe that was like in between my physical existence and my psychedelic existence, there was This Vajrayana practice space that, of course, taught me that these pop these practices, are much more powerful than I had appreciated, or I might have appreciated just from working with them, from my ordinary time, space consciousness, I also came to appreciate that these practices are empowered by the Morphic field. Which have been generated by 1000s and 1000s of beings doing these practices for hundreds and hundreds of years. The power of transmission the lung when a practice is given, it's not just to maintain the formal purity the practice, but there truly is an energetic transmission, and the power of this practice draws upon the cumulative power that is set in motion by 1000s of beings using these practices over many, many years. Now, I don't know whether to describe myself as a Vajrayana practitioner today, because while I do practice and I do meditate. The focus of my practice is different. In some ways. The focus of my practice is actually speaking. There is a way in which when I speak about these things, I remember them, when I remember them, they become actualized within me. When they become actualized within me, my mind shifts, my body shifts. Everything shifts inside of me. And so actually for me, this wonderful discussion that we've been having, and I really, really appreciate the deep, engaged quality of the questions you've been asking me and where you've been taking us. For me, this is like a spiritual practice. For me, your your questions give me the opportunity to open in ways that I wouldn't ordinary. I wouldn't be open in today otherwise, in that context, as part of my ongoing effort to simply to be useful to the universe. I practice. I do my practices, but I don't practice with the intention of trying to accomplish something beautiful, and I don't practice with the intention of changing what's going to happen to me when I die. Now it may be arrogant to say this, but I just report that I have a sense of what's going to open to me when I die, because I've been there. I've been there, different ways, been there, done that, and the universe has has made promises to me, and I don't think the promises are false. I think they're just very matter of fact, and so I don't practice in order to change what's going to happen to me when I die. I practice to change how I am right now, and to try to be of more use to people right now. So to kind of declare my system to clear my system to remember, yeah, and I use my psychedelic memories in my Vajrayana practice. You know, in Vajrayana there's the Samaya sattva and the chinana sattva, the being of practice which attracts the being of reality. And so we do these visualizations and exercises and mudras in order to create something which is an approximation of an eternal principle, by virtue of which we draw that principle into our being. Well, I use my memories as Samaya sattva in the creation of Samaya sattva in order to open the channels to the Jnana sattva of these principles in reality. And that, to me, is just, this is a this is a natural process. So I do the Vajrayana practices, but I do them with my own particular kind of twist. And understandably, it's hard to find a teacher who is comfortable with somebody who's owns a psychedelic history the way I own mine.

Andrew Holecek  2:04:19  
Yeah, and maybe, maybe that needs to change and adapt. I mean, and who are we to say that? Talk about the arrogance of that. Because, as you know, Chris and I'm so glad to hear you say this, there actually have been in the wisdom traditions admonitions, a warning against originality. That's very interesting to me, that originality is somewhat suspicious. And I find that a very interesting statement. On one level, yes, it abides by the elegance, the beauty of the tradition, and on one level, the sort of irreducibility, irreducibility of the awakened mind that's already been discovered. And I think if it's related to properly, that can prevent rogue and. Uh, science and the like. But on another level, if we don't evolve, we're going to go extinct. If we don't bring we meaning the wisdom traditions as a representative of if we don't bring new tributaries of upaya, skillful means, cultural adaptations to perennial traditions, then I think it's not going to be applicable to the modern age, and it's just going to be relegated to the dusty disciplines in dust bins, in old stole stale churches. But just a couple of things here before we close, because I don't want to take more advantage of your time. We started with this notion, or I did with this notion of hyper objects, top issues, topics, phenomena that are so big it's hard to wrap one's mind around that. You know, I always say stretching is good for growth. This has been a journey of a mental yoga, yeah, and I'm wondering if Is it too ostentatious to talk about. And I so appreciate your your humility, your modesty, but there's also tremendous power that you're releasing, that you are a shaman to, that you were expressing, and I so appreciate I've never really related to this is is also speaking as practice. Dialog is practice, engaging in what we're doing here is path that's really beautiful. But would you say, or is it fair to say that you're also pointing towards and this connects to your book, the living classroom, hyper pedagogy? Are you, in fact, intimating a possibility for accelerated forms of learning? And I resonate with this deeply, because when I explore what I call the nocturnal meditations, Dream Yoga and the like, one of the reasons I'm so passionate about these practices is because they are a revolution in pedagogy. It's a way to use the mind and the nocturnal arena to really accelerate learning, because you're working with these foundational dimensions and so is it fair to say, based on what your experience, that what you're also pointing to are possibilities for hyper pedagogical approaches where we can, in fact, accelerate our evolution, if it's held within the right view, within the right set and setting, within the right container, that we can really ramp things up in a healthy way, with a boat, again, with a Bodhisattva ideal, and the motivations and all the parameters of safety and security, because the faster you go, this isn't the essence of the Vajrayana. It's a jet versus a car. Jets can crash. Cars are safer, but they're slower. Is that a fair thing to say that if we relate to this properly, what you're also pointing out here is not only just hyper objects, but hyper pedagogical approaches.

Chris Bache  2:07:45  
I think so, yeah, you know, in the living classroom, I don't mention psychedelics at all. I wanted this book to be about fields of consciousness and the effects of fields on learning and the accelerating effect of focused intentionality and energetic transmission that takes place in the classroom or in any group context. And I don't talk about psychedelics at all. But the backstory to that book is this, I was doing my private psychedelic so called Private psychedelic practice. I was opening up into the ocean of suffering. I was going into these very, very deep collective states of consciousness and eventually into deeper, you know, Transcendence, states of consciousness. I never talked to my students about it, but I found that my students began to be impacted by my work in very precise ways. When I was going through certain thresholds. They began to go through certain spiritual thresholds. And it began to happen when I was lecturing, nothing to do with psychedelics, just lecturing on world religions, just something, and I would be looking for some example to use to make a point. And I experienced a door open in the back of my mind the way it first happened, and this little piece of paper slipped into I read the piece of paper, and it was an idea of something to use, and I tried it, and when I tried it, all of a sudden, the energy in the room shifted, and everything became more animated, and I began to work consciously with these kind of subtle suggestions that would pop into my mind from seemingly nowhere. And then few years down the road, students started to come to me, and they said at the end of class, you know, it's strange that you said what you said today, or gave this example, because this is exactly what happened to me this week, or this is exactly what happened to my mother. And at first I dismissed it, and I thought, okay, but it kept happening, and it kept happening, and the deep. My psychedelic practice went. It began to happen more, but it also began to touch deeper areas of their life. It was as if their soul was slipping messages to my soul, which was slipping it to me, leading me to say things that were giving them information or touching very intimate places in their life that I had no way of personally knowing about, experiences that places that they needed healing or information that they needed to take the next step in their learning, and this was became such a characteristic part of my teaching, so many people were being moved in ways that were beyond my conscious intention and even beyond my awareness when it was happening. And a pivot point came when I I looked at my class one day and while I was lecturing, and I looked up and I saw a half dozen, 10 people in the room with very quietly tears rolling down their face, and I realize I've got to understand what's happening. I really have to understand this. And that's the entire book living classroom was downloaded in 10 minutes in one session, the title just dropped right in. And I had been wrestling with this idea, but it gave me all the information I need to understand two basic points, but all of the both of them hinge around the fundamental reality that consciousness has an atomic quality, a separate quality, and it has a quantum quality. So there is individual awareness. And individual awareness is true. They don't know what I know. They're here to get what I know. We give a test, and I can test whether they have it, you know, that kind of stuff, but there's a quantum reality, that my individual experience is grounded in a quantum in an expansive field of consciousness, and they are grounded in this expansive field of consciousness, and that activates potentials, which are entirely natural. It's like throwing a stone into the war into a lake, and the ripples spread out. When one person does deep clarifying work, it triggers clarification in the consciousness of people that they have karma connection to. It's a simple, simple natural phenomenon. So I think what I eventually wrote down and clarified was, what would it be like if we taught consciously in a Transpersonal pedagogy, or in an integral pedagogy, or in a pedagogy that recognize the the innate interconnectivity of consciousness, which doesn't mean that we abandon the individual strategies that we know and work so well, but we incorporate using strategies of focused intentionality, of of conscious of conscious engagement that goes beyond classical teaching, so that, for example, you know Chud as a Vajrayana practice. It's a purification practice. And I learned Chud and I was doing ch for my spiritual practice. I began before class even began, when I would get a roster of the students for my class, I would start incorporating this roster in my ch practice. I would literally pray for my students using this particular vehicle. I would pray for them, and I pray for them through the entire course, for their well being. Not I don't try to. It's not my job to think I know what's right for them, or what they should be doing, or anything like that. I simply pray for their well being. I think the more we kind of activate these latent potentials in groups, the more we accelerate learning. And I found it's not only the there's not only a collective field in the room, but there is a class field. But even deeper than that is the course field, that there is a learning and empowerment that takes place over years, so that the students you have the individual mind situated within a class mind, situated within a course mind. This is an absolutely once you see it, once you understand it, you begin to recognize it happening in all sorts of different contexts, in different places. So if there is a hyper object, the hyper object is simply the connective tissue of mind. It's that we are at all. Always, always inherently connected, and we simply become conscious of that and become responsible to it, yeah, in whatever we're doing,

Andrew Holecek  2:15:09  
yeah. And again, it's back to that narrative of making unconscious processes processes and making unconscious processes conscious. Because if you can do that, then you can increase levels of communication, elicitation, evocative whatever, to then, then really heighten that what is, what is already again, it's already there. So why not take advantage of it? Why not engage it? Why not make it, bring it into conscious awareness, pay allegiance to it, surrender to it, and therefore enhance it, accelerate it in and of itself. And so Chris, I want to pay homage to your time. I just a few last things, the famous last words, wait a second, it'll be midnight.

Chris Bache  2:15:52  
Wait Chris, this is fun.

Andrew Holecek  2:15:55  
I mean, I literally, I could talk to you for the entire day. But to wrap it up for now, people are what you're releasing here is a Pandora's box of both wisdom and potential neurosis. And by this, what I mean is I wonder if you worry about what you've released here, because here's a little bit of where I want to close with this is I can definitely hear or imagine listeners going, this is for me. I This is my path. I want to do this. And they may see this as a quick fix, as a lazy man's approach. And of course, your book shows this is not for the feeble minded or the feeble hearted. You have to this is jihad. This is inner Dharma combat. You have to really go to work here. So what would you say, like Dharma surgeons General's warning, these teachings are hazardous to your egoic health, right? So I want to throw a little bit of a caveat to listeners who go, oh heck, I don't need to go into retreat. I don't need to do a three year retreat. I can just pop these pills and I'm going to attain these states. And I knew there was a quick silver bullet, this is it. So you understand, it's a slightly extreme rendering of this, but people glom onto these sorts of things, and they're gonna run into them, run with them with wrong motivation, with wrong intent. So talk to us as we close here several things. And this also ties into my experience. I have not done this yet, but I've talked to people who've done Ayahuasca retreats in Costa Rica. They go down there. They have these mind blowing experiences over four or five planned medicine trips, and then they leave, and then they tell me, I know these people. They go, it was great, but I don't feel supported. They don't follow up with me. I'm left completely to my own devices. I am like, what do I do with that? Yeah. So as we close for today, again, lots of noodles, because this topic is just so rich. Talk to us about like, if someone came to you, would you act as an advisor? Or are there advisors they can be drawn to? Do you take responsibility for this Pandora's box of wisdom that you're releasing? What are the shadow sides of doing this without proper sentence setting. And so I know trying to close, but I can't help myself. I think this is important. We have to throw some caveats out there for those who may be thinking that, ah, this is the long awaited spiritual silver bullet. I'll just pop these things and I'm good to go.

Chris Bache  2:18:37  
Yeah, boy, no silver bullet there. There are no shortcuts. In this one, I've learned there are no shortcuts. There are intensifications of practice, but there's no getting around the fundamental laws of spiritual reality. You know that there's just no getting around them? And the early idea that psychedelics represented an easy path. It just turned out to be facile and not true. In fact, my concern is just the opposite. My concern is that if you use these substances even conscientiously, they are, they can be so intense that it's too demanding a path. It's just too demanding. You have to really, really be wise in the in the handling of it. I'm I was very concerned in sharing this material, because it would break my heart if someone were to read my book and then jump into some type of use of psychedelics and injure themselves. And it's easy to injure yourselves, because you you open, you can open so deeply, so quickly that you really can't handle everything that comes at you. And you can, you can disrupt a healthy psyche in ways that can be permanently crippling, and it would. Break my heart if somebody did that, and I did a lot of practice, a spiritual practice around that particular issue. What we're learning is that breaking through, breaking the boundaries of the personal psyche, going into deeper states of consciousness, is really not that difficult. It's really not that hard. We're beginning to see more and more attention being given to integration, the requirements of integration, what constitutes a healthy practice. And I offer myself as an example of someone whose practice was not entirely healthy, I would think I went too deep, and it's caused me years of kind of, I won't say, distress, but years of having to manage

Chris Bache  2:21:04  
uh, the joy that I had temporary that I knew on a temporary basis. So and in it, one of the reasons I left the suffering I you know, I didn't blunt the suffering. In the book, there were people who were advising me don't put that in, because people are not going to get scared. They're not going to understand it. One of the reasons I put it in just because it was true and I promise to give it an accurate account, but I put it in partly because I wanted people to be able to understand how this stuff works, how understands it. They are amplifiers. Amplifiers brings up our garbage. It brings up our trash. We have to confront that garbage, confront that trash. But even when we do that and do that well, we still have to manage the wisdom of integration. There is a book that was just published this past year in England. It's inner tradition press psychedelics and psychotherapy. And the focus of this book is really on integration. And I have an essay in there with other people. My essay is called the challenge of integrating an extreme psychedelic journey, not simply in a psychedelic session, but an extreme psychedelic journey. I think we need more essays like that. We mean more discussions about what is good, what does healthy psychedelic practice look like? What are the symptoms of imbalance in psychedelic practice? What is the symptom of too much people chasing new experiences before they've integrated the experiences that they've had. I've seen many students suffering. They've literally fried themselves. Their energy feels very fried. They've gone back to the well too many times. They've plugged into the universe at too high a level. And they haven't stayed grounded. They feel kind of crispy. They have paid a price, and some people truly have paid a price of dysphoria and various types of imbalance, psychological imbalance from entering into these states. So the problem is, you see that our culture doesn't have a wisdom in the use of psychedelics. Some indigenous cultures do the shamanic cultures do have that wisdom. We have to learn from them how to use these practices wisely. Right now, we're using these practices within a therapeutic arena, and we are drawing upon our therapeutic wisdom of how to integrate these healing practices well. But as we go deeper, we have to go beyond therapeutic wisdom. We have to go into shamanic wisdom. We have to go into the sage tradition wisdoms, to really learn how to integrate these practices. Well, having deep experiences, it turns out, is not that difficult, and it's not necessarily very beneficial. It doesn't have a long lasting effect. Juliana, of Norwich, English mystic, had one. She was on her death bed. She was dying. She had a Near-Death Experience. She had an experience of the love of Christ, and she had an experience of the feminine God. She spent the rest of her life meditating on it, and she unpacked one experience in her book, the revelations of divine love. It takes years to unpack the full potential that's unleashed in even one experience. So it would there. We have a lot to learn. Hopefully, we will be wiser in this century with psychedelics than we were in the last century. In the 1960s where we did a lot of psychedelics, we had a lot of experiences, a lot of. Breakthroughs, lot of cap, some casualties, not as many as popular press would have us believe. But did we change people's lives profoundly and permanently? Some Yes, but not as many as we thought. Would we would? I think we need to really be wise and grounded in our reappropriation of psychedelics. Do you worry about what

Andrew Holecek  2:25:23  
you've released? I mean, one thing that comes to mind here is, I spent a lot of time in the Himalayas. I've tracked above Everest base camp. I've seen a lot of high altitude sickness. And so on one level, that's what this is like. It's like I've seen this where, when you're climbing to Everest, you've got to spend two days in Namche Bazaar, for instance, at 12,000 feet to acclimatize. And the people that don't, that don't acclimatize and go up, they're the ones that get high altitude cerebral or pulmonary edema and run into very serious problems. And then the way they have to cure it, as you know, you get headache, you stop, you go back down. You retreat to an altitude where the symptoms were not there, and then you slowly work your way up, otherwise the high altitude sickness, your lust for the summit, will kill you. So do you sometimes worry, Chris, about again, what you release? Because on one level, this ties in so beautifully, I think, to what we said, but I said at the outset, because that's why it's beautiful. Because I said, is, this is a form of Tantra, and it's interesting, is, I just wrote an article for tart, is the West ready for tantra? And as a form of Tantra, as you know, there are practices that are prescription strength, TUMO, dark retreat. There are practices that are does not designed for public consumption because they're too powerful. You're dealing with thermonuclear power as it's embodied in your subtle body. And so what you're talking about here is the danger of what's called salon practice, inner yoga practice where the condensed impact of your entire cosmic history is ensconced in your body and subtle body. And so when you're doing something like this, as the danger with doing inner yogas, and this is what your book screamed out to me. Said, Oh my gosh, Chris is doing inner yoga here, and this is why, not only is he opening his mind, he's opening his body. And as the channels winds, chakras are open and released, whoa, if you can't ride that wind, you're going to be blown away by that wind. And so I see this as a absolutely confluent with these prescription strength tantric practices, yeah, if I'm not done with the proper motivation, proper set in setting, really intelligently, they're not going to light you up, they're going to burn you up. And so again, lots of things being thrown out there. But I think this is really important, especially in the impatient West, where people, people are going to go shit, I'm just gonna run with this.

Unknown Speaker  2:28:01  
Yeah, do

Andrew Holecek  2:28:02  
you worry about you worry about what you

Chris Bache  2:28:04  
there, so to speak, or worry about it. I made, first of all that I do worry about it. It's, I'm glad we're talking about it. I hope I get opportunities to talk more about it. It needs to be discussed, the relationship between this high potency psychedelic as a spiritual practice, but also as a initial initiatory practice, and the practices that you're talking about as initiatory practices, they can burn you up. I got rather well singed. And, you know, had to manage them. Have had to manage them. The other side of it is the mother asked me. She said, You know, we did not give you these visions for you. We gave them for the people. She said, Let them see me through your eyes. Just, just let me see. Let them see me through your eyes, as you have seen me. And it's like, I am not important. What's important is what was shown me, and I hope that by sharing that cleanly and honestly, it will help people in their own spiritual development. That is my fundamental conviction, my fundamental motivation as a philosopher. I trust my students to deal with the information that I make available to them, even when it jars their system, even when it upsets their agricultural worldview. I work with them to make sure that they don't get pushed too hard, that they integrate them. This is something. It's a. Little different. This isn't a way I've said something. I've not said it in motion. It's happening all around me. I'm simply one voice which is part of a psychedelic revolution. It's just one voice trying to bring some clarity on one certain set of issues. I should also mention that I made a choice a long time ago, not to function as a therapist, not to function as a clinician, but to function as an explorer. I do not work with other people. I do not work as a therapist. I do not take people in psychedelic sessions. I don't do that work. That's a different set of skills. It requires training that I don't have. I work with people who are training to be those people, and there are lots and lots of places where people are training to work as psychedelic elders and as psychedelic therapists, and I'm in conversations with some of these training groups. I'll be doing one this coming weekend, in fact. But I've made a choice to really work as an explorer and to bring a report back and to support other people who are working as clinicians, who are really trying to help people use this material wisely. Now, as I said, I think right now we're learning the wisdom in the therapeutic context. We still have to learn that wisdom, incorporate that wisdom into the shamanic the shamanic wisdom, and to integrate the wisdom that comes from the sage tradition different levels of depth, I just trust that we will find that wisdom. I hope there are not casualties or not too many casualties along the way in that process. I do worry about it. I trust. I just in the end, I have to trust that we will find the wisdom to do this. Now, my sense is we're going there. No matter what psychedelics are here, they're not going away. They didn't go away during the 40 years of prohibition. They're not going away. Now what we need to do is accelerate and deepen our understanding of how to what they are, how they work, and how to work with them. Well, what they do and don't give us. And in my book, I've really tried to emphasize the underbelly of psychedelics, that they are temporary, that my chapter on methodology is the path of temporary immersion. That's not the same as the path of contemplative immersion. You really have to work with those limitations and understand them, to work with them safely, and they are powerful. And I really mean it. I don't recommend that people work with high doses of LSD as consistently and methodically as I did. I wouldn't do it that way again, I would be gentler with myself. I would open up smaller windows, gentler substances, lower doses, precisely because of the challenge of sustaining the impact how these experiences impact you, not only in the days immediately following your session, but in the years following your session.

Andrew Holecek  2:33:23  
Yeah, you know, so interesting, Chris, you talked earlier about and this is a wonderful definition of translation of Shunyata. Emptiness is translucency, transparency and one on one level, you are the exemplar of that transparency. There's no difference between the inner and outer with you, and to me, it's really quite beautiful to see. And I also have to share a little bit of the magic that I'm feeling, even in the conversation itself, that and I hope my listeners take this in the right way. Some of these questions are not coming from me. I can tell when I'm asking a question. But I can also tell when these questions are coming from me, and so this next one did not come from Me, and I hope it's okay to ask this in relationship to the beloved, to the mother. Do you ever feel? Do you ever feel that you were brought into this world on behalf of the mother, to act as her child, Luminosity, to act as that voice. I mean, do you ever look at your trajectory as actually being a kind of Avatar of the mother itself that you were brought to again, this idea of purpose and divine purpose and teleology. Does that? Does that speak to you around this? Or do you feel this is a little bit more sort of serendipitous? I mean, another way you could say this in my languaging is to what degree is karma predispose you towards this? But more specifically, using your languaging, do. You think the beloved sent her child into this world, right? Well, we're getting really Christian here, man, right? Yeah, tongue in cheek aside, I think you hope you see where I'm coming from.

Chris Bache  2:35:13  
I think that before I answer the specific, I want to answer the general. I think that many of us at first, I believe that we all knew what we were getting into before we incarnated. We have choices to make, and we choose our incarnation. Now, we may not choose it, if we're if we're kindergarteners, we don't let them choose their curriculum, but by the time you're in high school and college and graduate school, you're choosing your curriculum. And I think this, this is true about reincarnation too. We choose our incarnation. We choose the form of it. We choose the timing of it. We choose the place of it. We knew at a time when we knew more than we know now what we're getting into. We said yes to the options that of this incarnation. So I think this is the lives that we are living are, for the most part, for the vast majority, I think, are chosen lives, okay? And I think this is true for me, and I don't think, I certainly don't think I'm an, you know, an Ishtar for the for the mother. But I have always considered myself in service of the mother. I'm in it's in my astrological chart. It's in my constitutional chart. I I wanted to be, you know, my first vocation in life was to be a priest. I woke up when I woke up at five or six years old, I wanted to be a priest, and I was raised Catholic, and that's how it expressed itself. But that fell away. But the desire to serve, the desire to know and to serve, was always there, as it is for many of us. And so I also learned along the way, not in my psychedelic work, but actually in some hypnotic work I was doing in past life therapy work that I have history with psychedelics. I have Native American history with psychedelics. It's what made me comfortable with this mode of spiritual practice. So I believe that I was born to do what I did. And that's, that's not inflationary, that's just, that's just very simple this, this is what I did, what came naturally to him, and it's no big deal. It's just what is I love to teach. Just so happened that it took a little bit of a twist, and I'll add one other little, small piece, there's been great benefit to me in this in that I also learned that I have had a number of lives where I paid a price for speaking I was tortured and killed for speaking out, and so I was internalized. I brought that resistance in this lifetime, and it's not been easy. From the first time I wrote on reincarnation. I had to overcome great resistance, but what I found was that by overcoming that resistance and speaking the truth as best as I could understand it, it always worked out well. It always I was always richly rewarded for the process. So there's been so learning for me in rising to the challenge of doing this. It's not been easy to write about psychedelics in our particular culture, but look, the friendships that it's given me, the context that it's given me the opportunities to be with people, has been very rewarding. And I think, I think there are a lot, lots and lots and lots of people who are like me, like yourself, who have deep, deep spiritual hunger, spiritual drive. And they they do it, and as they get into it. They're not holding this just for themselves. They are truly Bodhisattvas. They're doing this practice for everybody. First thing you do in a practice awaken bodhicitta, and the last thing you do in your practice is you distribute the merit. You know, this is, this is just the nature of reality. This is just the very simple process of waking up to the true condition, which is a shared existence that we all, that we all embody.

Andrew Holecek  2:39:31  
Yeah, breathtaking, breathtaking. Chris, really. How can people learn more about you? Again, I'm going to probably going to say one more thing, and we're going to be here till midnight. But how can people learn more about you? What are you currently working on? How can we support you? Part of, part of what we do, my aspiration is cross pollination. Is bringing, bringing this core. Of sanity so that we can increase connectivity, enhance the connective tissue, strengthen it and into whatever degree possible at whatever levels of reality, overt or covert, support each other. So how can my community learn more about you, support you and your journey, and what are you currently working on that we can look

Chris Bache  2:40:19  
forward to? Yeah, well, it's very kind of you to ask that I just finished teaching a seven week course at the shift network, which is basically a seven week course built around LSD in the mind of the universe. And that course is now it's available, and people can get that course and download it, and there's an hour lecture followed by half an hour of Q and A and, you know, there's material there, and there's also readings there that they can go into. I have a website, Chris bache.com, it's unfinished, but it's there. And if you want to get access to some of my talks or some of the things I've written, they're there. I don't do a bulletin. I in right now, still absorbing the feedback from the course I did with the shift network. I probably will do some more teaching with them. I will probably be having conversations like we're having now, for people who want to have the kind of conversations that flow out of critical psychedelic practice and with a spiritual twist to it. I look forward when covid allows us to gather together in groups to do retreats. I happen to live outside of Asheville, where there are lots of retreat centers around here, and I hope that there'll come a time when people can gather, we can gather physically for long, weekend or week long retreats where we can just enter into the discussion more deeply. I don't have any immediate plans for that. I'm just, I live kind of in a responsorial mode. You wanted to have a conversation. I'm delighted to have this conversation, but I just thought of wait until things come to me, and we'll take it

Andrew Holecek  2:42:39  
from there. Beautiful, beautiful. Well, Chris, I just like with your book, you're I'm left with just this perfume, this this sense of awe and wonder. It really the magic and mystery of the entire affair, the the surrender to some whatever you want to pen hyper object them, and necessarily not a silly word, but a shrink wrap word for the ineffability, the elegance, the beauty, the magic of this world and your your presence really embodies to me, and that's why so much I wanted to do this, not just merely audit, audit with audit, auditory means, but also visual means. Is you're doing something right. You're doing something right, and your mere presence conveys the kind of authenticity, if I may be so presumptuous, of what you've done and what you've elected to be as your path. And we are the beneficiaries of your the diamonds that you're throwing across this planet. And so on behalf of my community, really, thank you for taking time out of your busy life to spend some time with us, and I'm just left somewhat breathless. Breath taking the insights that you shared is really, truly, deeply inspiring. And I don't pivot these words out lightly. It's really mind bending, mind blowing. And what a tremendous gift your courage in your beauty has brought to this world so deep, deep. Thanks, my friend, until Until next time

Chris Bache  2:44:05  
I really touched Andrew, thank you very much, and thank you for your work. Thank you for the goodness that you're spreading, for the for the ideas that you're seeding. And it's really been an honor to be in conversation with you today.

Andrew Holecek  2:44:22  
Thank you. My words, and maybe we can do it again in this dimension or another. So all the best, until next time, my friend sounds good. Okay. Much Love you.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
