Roger Walsh  0:00  
Roger, welcome to today's episode of deep transformation, self, society, spirit. I'm Roger Walsh, and our co host is the distinguished John Dupuy and guest today is the truly remarkable Chris Bache, who is a internationally known professor of Philosophy and Religious Studies, an author, an award winning teacher and an internationally known speaker, usually in these dialogs, John Knight tries to stay in the background. But the topic of today is so remarkable, the experiences described so literally out of this world, that I want to just give a take a moment to give a context for the discussion, compared to the world's many cultures, Western culture is unusual in a variety of ways. In fact, researchers have recently described this as weird, W, i, e, r, d, Western, industrialized, educated, rich and democratic, and so much research has been done on Westerners, that it was assumed that our characteristics were pretty much common to the world's cultures. But now we're beginning to see that that's not true, and that other cultures have their own richnesses and gifts a wide variety. One very important distinction between traditional Western culture and most of the world's cultures is in their attitude and use of altered states of consciousness. The anthropologist rica bush and on discovered in her world world survey that over 90% of the world's cultures have institutionalized altered states of consciousness, meaning that they use a variety of practices to induce specific states of consciousness and then mine them for the information and wisdom they use and look they and venerate states such as dreams, hypnosis, a trance of various kind and states induced by meditation, contemplation, yoga, asceticism, a wide variety, and these cultures, anthropologists now call Police polyphasic, meaning that they draw the understanding of reality from many phases of consciousness. By contrast, Western culture is pretty unique in having been until very recently, a monophasic culture, in that we draw our understanding of ourselves in the world almost entirely from the usual waking state and kind of look down on other states as inferior or deluded or distorted in various ways. But that's begun to change, and it began to change in the 60s, of course, with an introduction of psychedelics to the culture, which was soon followed by an influx of Asian practices, meditation, yoga, contemplations, and after that, by the rediscovery and rebirth of Western contemplative practices, so that now we have in the West a wide variety of practices for inducing altered states. And the West is undergoing a dramatic and very important but often unrecognized transformation from a monophasic culture to a polyphasic culture, one in which we are now beginning to appreciate and research and draw our understanding of ourselves and Reality from multiple states of consciousness, one of the most potent and remarkable ways of inducing all the states is with psychedelics. That's what started our own Western cultures transformation, and it's now the subject of a lot of solid research at places like one of the leaders is John Hopkins University, where scientists and clinical clinicians are discovering that psychedelics have, just as the original research in the 60s and 70s found a wide variety of therapeutic applications and and perhaps most surprising, very profound spiritual applications, the capacity for inducing profound openings to radically altered states in which which profound vistas and understandings of ourselves and re. Howard has become available. That, of course, is not new to the rest of the world, but this is new to Western research, and the findings are quite remarkable. So we're very fortunate in having with us a man who has devoted his life to the research of these curious chemicals, and has done it both through academic research and comparative cultural analysis, but also through a remarkably intense, long, lasting, carefully analyzed and documented systematic exploration of the use of these chemicals themselves, his experiences are nothing less than extra ordinary, and have far, far reaching implications for our understanding of the fundamental nature of reality in ourselves. He did this in as a systematic investigation into the fundamental nature of reality, and he was able to reflect on his first hand observations with the eye of a trained researcher, philosopher, theologian. And then he pulled together cross cultural, historical and religious evidence to bring to bear on his own investigations that so these are some of the remarkable things our guest, Chris Bache has explored. I mentioned that he was a prolific author, and His books include dark night, early dawn, subtitle steps to a deep ecology of mind. He's also taught about and written about education and as an award winning educator himself, and his book is titled The living classroom. And most recently, he wrote the literally mind boggling book LSD in the mind of the universe, in which he detailed his exploration of psychedelics and the insights they opened for him. So that's a long introduction, but it felt important to give a context for these very remarkable experiences that Chris will be gifting us with in sharing his his insights over the many years of deep, systematic exploration. I've just spent the weekend going back to the book. I read it a couple of years ago in manuscript form, and was impressed enough to write a review for it, and I've been spending the weekend with it, and once again, I feel like I've had my worldview expanded multiple times and my understanding of myself and reality challenged multiple times, all in very valuable ways. So Chris, that's a long introduction, but it's truly a delight and an honor to be with you today, and thank you so much for being with us.

Chris Bache  8:03  
Thank you, Roger. It's a very warm introduction, and I'm just delighted to be here with you and John today. It's a pleasure.

Roger Walsh  8:10  
Well, there are many places we can we can go with this, and hopefully we will, but Roger,

John Dupuy  8:16  
allow me to give my little two cents, please. Yes. Last week, Roger asked me, Would you like to have Christopher Bache on? I was like, seriously, yes, and I had one week, or less than a week, so immediately, I ordered the book and I got the audio version. Thank God, and that's what that's kept me through the weekend. But I just want to put out there, your book dark night, early dawn, was one of the more important books for me, personally, that I've ever read. So when your name came up again, the possibility to have this conversation. Now, I'll tell you what I I can't remember all the specifics, but after 20 years, it's been a while when I first read it, I had a stabilized understanding of Non-duality based on my explorations and journeys and vision questing and fasting and prayers and meditation and all that. And I kind of got it, but the way you expressed it, something in that book just consolidated it, and it has been accessible to me in a stable form ever since then. So that's that's a tremendous gift. So this, this book that I have been listening to is unlike anything that I've experienced, and it is either you're absolutely sane or you're completely insane. I my experiences along these lines, says this really stinks of deep truth, and I. Also the very human, the very humble way that you present, and self revelatory what's going on in your personal life and how you did it and everything is, is somebody with an open mind, I think, is, is just ends up trusting you, just, I'm in the hands of somebody I can listen to. And then from there, it goes on to it's very big. This may be a bringing together of everything we've been working on in our generation, but in a new, holistic, religious, scientific, everything vision that that transforms us from a reality where a lot of us are killing ourselves or live in deep depression to an absolutely 1,000% changed view of reality. And I'm not using that as hyperbole, at least I'm not trying to it's that big. It's that radical. Is that that pay attention to this.

Chris Bache  11:10  
Thank you. Your description, John touches me very deeply, and it really touches me that something I've written has influenced your experience of Non-duality that just really touches me. Thank you,

Roger Walsh  11:26  
beautiful, yeah, Chris, of course. I think everyone will want to know what motivated you to begin this extraordinary quest. And maybe you can just say, say a little bit about water, the nature of what you actually did to induce these remarkable experiences and what motivated you to begin?

Chris Bache  11:51  
Well, all my life, I've had a just a deep passion to understand our universe. I mean, I was in the seminary, starting in high school training to be a Catholic priest. Left that went on to get a degree in theology from Notre Dame and then Cambridge and brown, I finished Brown in philosophy of religion, but an absolute, convinced agnostic with strong atheistic inclinations, but the passion to understand what's real. Why is there so much suffering in the world? Is there an intelligence in existence was still there, still pushing me in all of my studies now, I had finished my dissertation. I was looking for where to go next, and I encountered Stan Grof book, realms of the human unconscious, that extraordinary book that just turned my life around and one reading, he convinced me that LSD, or psychedelics, could be used safely, if you use them in a pro with proper precautions to explore the deep structure of one's consciousness. And some of his anecdotes also indicated more than one's own personal unconscious that one could reach out deeper to explore deeper fabric of consciousness. And I quickly realized the philosophical significance, not just psychological significance, of his work. So I realized that people in my profession, philosophy of religion, my discipline, would soon the ones making the most important contribution to the field would be people writing out of an experiential basis, not just an intellectual basis. To do that, you have to have not just a few experiences, but you have to undergo systematic training in the discipline. So that's what I did. It was 1979 when I began what became a 20 year journey, I worked for four years, I stopped for six years for reasons that I give in the book, and then I resumed for 10 years. But overall, over 20 years, I did 73 high dose LSD sessions following Stan's protocol, and this is a regimen that I wouldn't recommend, I really don't recommend. Today, with hindsight, I realized that I really pushed myself harder than was sometimes wise, but I use a lot of precautions. I took, did all of the classic training for and precautions for doing fully internalized sessions with a sitter. My sitter was a clinical psychologist whom I was married to at the time, Carol and using very carefully selected evocative music, basically, let me mention, I worked with high doses of LSD initially, because I was still thinking in terms of a model of individual awakening or individual healing. And I was thinking I knew that karma, according to the eastern models, it was finite karma, and basically I wanted to accelerate my own. Spiritual development, and I thought that if I could sustain the intensity of the confrontation, I could basically bite off bigger bites of karma in each session if I worked with high doses rather than melt it more slowly with low doses. And it was simply a matter of efficiency. It was hard to hit time for these sessions in a dual career marriage, and I just thought I would work a little harder, more aggressively. And that turned out that was based on a completely false set of assumptions. I found that in my work, within a few years, I was entering into domains that were far, far beyond anything that made sense in terms of an individual model of transformation. I began to understand that my sessions had been had catalyzed something that was aimed at nothing less than some type of healing or transformation of the human species as a whole. So working with very, very high doses, since, since existence is unified from the very start, working with high doses that hyper amplifies consciousness, activates it only it changes not only how deep you go, but it changes how wide you are when you go there. So it activates a larger field of consciousness, which then triggers the the cycles of death and rebirth that workings with psychedelics therapeutically does. So I did this for 20 years, and I finished in 1999 and then I digested those experiences for another 20 years this. This a very challenging undertaking. It took a long time to connect all the dots and to absorb them, and it took me five years to write the book. Yeah, yeah, it's a lot. Yeah. I was thinking I would be much more comfortable writing this book posthumously, holding it and releasing it posthumously, because it is so exposing in the sense of your most intimate relationship with the divine. But the mother told me no, there's no time for that kind of indulgence. The word it was needed, and it would mesh, it would support other people in their work and our times that we're going into. Historically, we all hands on deck. You know, all hands on deck needed to come forward now,

Roger Walsh  17:38  
beautiful and and it really does feel that this work you did, and really was work of exploration with these psychedelics and the writing of the book, really is was done out of a very large motive And and as you said, it was, it was work. I was struck by just the, you know, our culture has this very naive media view of psychedelics as being done for, you know, getting high and having a good time. And, yes, that can happen. But, and you had some extraordinary ecstatic experiences. But you also went through the hell realms, not once, but multiple times. And as you describe having to open to levels of not only your own suffering, but collective suffering, the history of human cruelty, et cetera, et cetera. I mean, this was extraordinary. I just found myself bowing to the courage you had to bring to this time after time after time, and yet you always seem to find that ultimately, there was a value in the suffering. I wonder if you could say what kept you going and what kind of value found there.

Chris Bache  19:04  
Well, this was the great gift that Stan gave me in his work. He taught me to trust the process, and that was affirmed in my own experience. And my experience was, if you completely trust the process and let your session take you where it wants to take you, it may get worse and worse. You may enter experiences that are completely inscrutable, that completely horrifying. You don't understand why you're going here or what sense it makes. But if you surrender to it completely, this will come eventually to a culmination, and you'll be taken through a Death-Rebirth cycle. You some part of you will die, will slough off. You'll be taken into a transition. And through this transition, you will awaken in a different reality, into a different level of reality. And for the remainder of that session, you will. Experience, teaching our experiences within a completely ecstatic framework. So there is the purification side of a session and the ecstatic side of a session. So what you internalize at the end of the day is not just the suffering, but the entire cycle that suffering reaches a peak. There is a culmination, there is a breakthrough, and then there's joy and ecstasy and communion, and then integration at the end, it's the balance of the joy and the ecstasy of insight with the purification process that makes it manageable. If I had to go through all the suffering for years. Without that ecstatic teaching, I would not have been able to do it as it was. It was difficult when I was going through the ocean of suffering, which was in the third and fourth years of the work, fifth, fifth year of the work, the morning of a session, was difficult because I had a sense of what I was getting into, where it was going, but I don't think it's any more difficult than a soldier on the eve of a battle or a mother on the eve of labor. You know if it's especially if it's your second or third birth, you know what you're getting into. You know it's going to be a hard day. You Gird your loins and you prepare for it. And in for my case, I don't think what I did was any more exotic than someone who wants to climb Mount Everest or someone who wants to go to the North Pole. Personally, I don't know why anybody in their right mind would want to climb Mount Everest, you know, but you but I do understand the explorers mentality. I wanted to see, I wanted to understand, I wanted to know. And no matter how deep I went, I found that there was always more that I could be shown, that would be shown me.

John Dupuy  22:01  
Did you feel you were being held or guided in some in some sense, taken care of in

Chris Bache  22:09  
this journey and every step along the way, when I would go through this consciousness was waiting for me, and I might not understand the logic of the sequence of the pairing of things for years. In fact, there are certain things that I only began to understand when I wrote the book, but as I went through, I had a basic structure enough to know that there was a logic to this process, and I always felt met. I felt met and engaged, sometimes very consciously, where I would ask questions and it would orchestrate my experience. But always, there was an intelligence, meeting me, taking me, educating me, breaking me down, beating me down to dust, taking me further, taking me back, over and over again until I understood something, and then it would take me deeper. And there was a systematic progression to this process. I found that this systematic progression was really important, because there's so many levels of consciousness that it can take you into but when you enter a new level of consciousness, it's very disorienting. It just cognitively is confusing you, and this manifests by not being able to remember everything that happened to you. You just don't have a framework in your mind to hold it. But if you go back to it again and again and again, and you're systematic and rigorous, and you record carefully, your system will acclimate, and you will learn how to stay conscious in dimensions of reality that previously had swallowed you and I actually began in Time to realize that this deeper consciousness was titrating the experiences of Transcendence, giving me time to absorb and acclimate, even though sometimes I wanted to run on it kept me and fed me in small steps so that I could retain and hold what it had been Giving me. Because the purpose I found was not simply to transcend and experience some form of ecstasy. The purpose was to bring that ecstasy back into your time space consciousness. And first, hold on to it, remember it, and then secondly, digest it and let it seep into your bones as deeply as possible.

John Dupuy  24:43  
And you talked about in the book is how you framed, or you became to understand that the hell realms, suffering realms that you would have to visit were for your benefit and they were for purification. Mm. Or that they were getting you prepared for the revelation.

Chris Bache  25:06  
Yeah, there. It's complicated. I mean, it took me about two and a half years to go through what Stan Grof calls the perinatal dimension of consciousness, the perinatal level where the purifications are very intense, and the physical purification and emotional purifications, which eventually end, and for me, ended an ego death, you know, like just being shattered, my entire physical identity being turned inside out. And then the ocean of suffering began. And in the beginning, I thought this was a deeper form of personal suffering. It was a deeper form of ego death, but eventually, and this is why I wrote Dark Matter Lee dawn at core, to answer this question, to solve the riddle, why did the suffering get as large as it did? And the conclusion I came to is that it really wasn't aimed at my personal transformation at all. It was aimed at healing the human species, that the human psyche in an aggregate form, at the collective unconscious, there are wounds which humanity has still not healed, the things that we've done to each other in war, the terrible disasters that all the suffering that human beings have accumulated, not all of it, has been healed, and that there are vast tracks of the collective psyche where this suffering still festers. And I think every spiritual tradition recognizes that in deep spiritual practice, you have an opportunity. You don't have to do it, but an invitation is sometimes extended, that if you are willing to take on some of that suffering, literally, just to become aware of it, it can move through you and resolve itself, just like our personal suffering enters into our awareness, moves through us and resolves itself. And so for two years, I did the ocean of suffering work, and it wasn't really until about halfway through that that I began to understand that this wasn't for me. It was for my family. It was for the human family, and only later did I begin to understand the historical circumstances of our times that made the healing of the human family, the healing of our past, so important in order to clear the foundation, so to speak, to allow an imminent transformation to take place in history.

John Dupuy  27:51  
And I'm sure that gave you, you mentioned girding your lines up, that gave you that warrior or soldierly perspective, it's not just about you, Chris, you know, to do this thing that was way beyond, way beyond any human capacity to survive, I would believe, just, just on its own, but To keep coming back and not and it shifts from being an individual quest to

Chris Bache  28:28  
everybody and everything. And it may be the case that this, it's largely a function of my choice to work with these very, very high doses that blow you so deeply into the deep structure of reality. But I think one of the things I learned it made this may not open for everybody. Everybody may not enter these domains. One of the things I learned over the course of my journey is that this was a task which my soul took on before I was born. So this was part of my karmic choice to do this work so it wasn't forced upon me and it wasn't a tragedy. It was simply part of my life's work, and the universe more than rewarded me for this phase of the work, because following the ocean of suffering, it took me places in the ocean of suffering, and afterwards it more than amply paid me, or repaid me for taking this work on. As always happens, whenever you do anything for others, the universe has no choice but to get give back to you. That's because the universe acts out of oneness. So if we do something for others, it always comes back to you in one form or another,

Roger Walsh  29:56  
beautiful and in a sense. Sounds as though this shift you went through from the assumption with which you entered this work, that you were doing it for your own understanding, Revelation, transformation, and yet you were forced, almost against your inclinations, to see this in a larger context, that you were in some way, some mysterious way, both opening to and allowing yourself to be an instrument for the transformation of collective consciousness. And I can certainly understand that was challenging, because it's a very different it's a different world view. It's a very different set of assumptions about the nature of ourselves and reality that even makes that recognition possible. And I can certainly understand what a shift that was. Would you like to say more about that?

Chris Bache  30:57  
My first concern was that, at first it sounded like ego gone amok. I mean, it sounded like ego inflation. And so I really had to sit with that for a long time, because my experiences were telling me that was not what was happening, but the larger challenges, as you said, Roger, this is a very different worldview in the classic individual patient model, you the individual is having experiences. So you the individual has Transpersonal experiences, and the individual is always kind of at the center of the circle. But in this model, my individual existence was completely secondary to this dynamic, and so it becomes not a matter of my being being central to what's happening. I got the system, I got something started, but I dissolve completely into pre existing fields of consciousness. And these fields of consciousness are, what are the dynamic force having these experiences? So it manifests not only in the ocean of suffering, but it manifests later, when I was going into archetypal reality and causal oneness. Reality, it's hard to describe, but in many ways, in many experiences, I was like Chris Bache was like a bit player, not like there is something going on. This is so challenging that the in the book, I have an appendix, which, in the appendix is what dies and is reborn. When you experience so many deaths and rebirths, it becomes a cognitive question, what is it that's actually dying? It feels personal and you experience it. Is it just ego dying over and over again? And the answers that I offer at that in that part, I know, push very, very far. I mean, because on the one hand, it's ego, and then it becomes species ego, and then it becomes something I call the shamanic persona. But in the end, what is dying, I think, is literally some aspect of cosmic consciousness, or some dimension of cosmic reality, is softening and surrendering and opening up to a still deeper dimension of cosmic consciousness. And this deeper dimension of cosmic consciousness pours its blessings into me at the very bottom. But it's not primarily into me. It pours it into the deeper dimension of cosmic consciousness itself. And I know those are very hard concepts to entertain, and it's a it's a very different way of thinking, and it's tentative my description, but something along that order, I think, is required to understand when you explode consciousness this radically. And again, I don't think it's wise for people to explode consciousness this radically, I would work with lower doses. I'd work with Psilocybin, gentler substances, if I were doing it over again. Here, we have to appreciate that LSD in this quantity, when it's contained, when it's intensified in a therapeutic modality, you basically just shatter your consciousness and dissolve it far beyond physical limits, and you spend hours dissolved into some stratum of the universe and. And then you congeal and consolidate it. And then you shatter, leaving your historical existence radically behind and dissolve into into some fabric, some stratosphere, of consciousness. And you live there for a while. It lives. You are it part of it as it lives. And then you congeal and bring it back and hold it beautiful.

Roger Walsh  35:37  
I'd love, I'd love to tease out several things you said, but, but I do want to ask a very specific question, that is, you've referred on several occasions to the very high doses of LSD used. So might you just tell us what doses you did use?

Chris Bache  35:54  
Yeah, I aim to be working at 600 micrograms, but because I wasn't using a pharmaceutical, identified dose, I would say 500 to 600 micrograms to be safe, but it was not less than five.

Roger Walsh  36:12  
There's a lot of LSD, yes, put mildly, and I want to, I want to tea, tease out your description of this very remarkable phenomena, that of the Death-Rebirth experiences, which is found as a as a and recognized as a very important experience, and a literal birth experience, Psych, spiritual birth experience across the world, spiritual traditions. It's deliberately sought in traditions such as Shamanism, and yet you describe it in not an entirely new way, but a radically expanded way, as a repetitive process of dying to one identity and limitation after another, after another, after another, reconstituting a new, new, more porous, expanded identity, and then having to offer that into into the whole and let me just see check my Understanding of Death-Rebirth against yours. And have you? Have you respond, from your enlarged perspective, to me, it seems that what actually dies, what we confuse ourselves to be, and what actually dies and Death-Rebirth experience is our self representation. We mistake a self image or a self concept or a self narrative for our true self, and what needs to die is that representation. So it dies, we find ourselves opened to a much larger perspective and possibility, both of both of our own identity and of the nature of reality. But for some reason, I tended to think, until hearing you just now, I tended to think of for psychological reasons, psychodynamic, habitual patterns re establish themselves, and another self representation forms. But you're putting this in a larger, more cosmic or ontological perspective, suggesting that an even deeper understanding of the of the Death-Rebirth would be that one that as part of the cosmic play, the leela, the the the formation of the universe by the two cosmic beings that you describe in one place in your book, that that separation is built into the game, the cosmic game, as Stan Grof would call it. And what I'm understanding you to say is that identity is reconstituted in a rebirth process because of the very nature of the of the universe and consciousness that consciousness separates so as to play again. Am I understanding you correctly?

Chris Bache  39:17  
I think your description of ego death is spot on. What dies is what is consumed. Is our self representation, what we have, our sense of identity that we've amassed from our physical experience and our time space existence, our time space experience. And I also want to mention that every every medicine has a certain range. It has a certain, you know, signature, and it has a sort of power and of range. Psilocybin has a certain depth of range that even if you repeat it many times, it will reach you, take you into the upper register. But still, there is a upper register. Ayahuasca has a range, and maybe I think of it as a deeper upper register. Salvia divinorum has a range, ketamine and five Meo, DMT, all of these substances have ranges. Now one of the things, and LSD has a range, and of course, then we start looking at doses and how doses affect the range. Now, I tend to experience Psilocybin as a very body grounded type of psychedelic experience, very much tuned to my emotional body, it opens up a range, but it's it's it's it stays, in a sense, within the parameters. It stretches, but does not shatter as aggressively as LSD does the parameters of individual identity, but it can dissolve them, soften them, and open this up, in my experience in working with high doses of LSD, is that all of these things happen, but because of the particular intensity of this substance and its lack of history, anthropologically, it's therefore it doesn't have the fields associated with it that Psilocybin and Mescaline or Peyote have associated with it. It tends to shatter our time space identity, and throw us in a level of experience that lies beyond that reality in a spiritual reality. But if we, if we go back to that place again and again, our experience there begins to congeal, and we develop an alternative identity persona. I call it the shamanic persona. It is an identity which is comprised of all of my experiences at that level of Transpersonal reality. And it's kind of super ordinate to my individual egoic identity. But it's stable. If my experiences have been well managed, it's stable. So that when I go into a psychedelic space, and I transition away from time and space and I I enter into a familiar sense of self at a certain level of spiritual reality. But if and I acclimate there, I learn how to stay conscious there. I i learn the ropes, and then I but if I keep pushing the edge, if I if the if the chemical is strong enough, and if the intent is focused enough, eventually, in my experience, you come to the ceiling, and at that ceiling, there is a cost that's exacted. Another round of death takes place. But what's dying is not the ego. What's dying is that shamanic persona or that second identity, because that second identity is a holder of a certain level of Transpersonal experience. And if you want to go deeper, you don't need to, but if you want to go deeper, you've got to die at that lower shamanic level. And so the shamanic identity dies, and you transition into yet another level of reality in which the whole workings of the universe is different, different rules, different phenomena exist, different bandwidth, so to speak. And you must acclimate to that level of reality. Every step deeper into the universe is a step into a higher level of energy. I can over. And you to acclimate at a particular level of reality, you must acclimate to the energy. And that's some of the very, very intense cleansing that continues to take place, 3040, 50 sessions in is because you're, you're you're learning how to stabilize consciousness is extremely high levels of Energy. That just takes a long time. So, so what eventually came out of all of this is appreciate is an understanding that death and rebirth is stage specific, that there are many levels of the universe, and if you systematically push through those levels, there are a. Gates that you come to, so to speak, and at each gate, there is a sacrifice asked now at the end, eventually, once you've died so many times, death becomes a meaningless concept, because you always learn that you're always going to be reborn. Some essence of our identity will continue. The Phoenix always rises. Eventually, the concept, or the concept of death, as an interpretation of what's happening, yielded to a concept of purification. I learned that all dying is, in fact, purification. It's just that when purification reaches so deep, it's destructuring whatever self representation or whatever reality representation you're operating within, it becomes purification unto death. It's actually dissolving the structures within which you are holding reality and death. So it's it's death, but it's a fluid death. It's a purification process.

John Dupuy  46:10  
So, so Chris following up what Roger asked about what dies? Well, what doesn't die?

Unknown Speaker  46:17  
Yeah. Ah.

John Dupuy  46:23  
Because in your book, you talk a lot about reincarnation has been being a given in in the universe as it was revealed to you, this universe, multiverse, whatever this mysterium tremendum is that you've brought back to us to talk about, so what doesn't die?

Chris Bache  46:43  
Well, I think when we go deep, we realize that everything is dying constantly. Everything is dying and living and dying and living constantly. There. There are no stable things which are not dying in this universe. And to see that clearly of is, of course, is is considered a great accomplishment to really understand that everything is temporary, everything is transition, everything is moving. Everything is fluid, holding on. You know, people have asked me, What is it dies. And you know, there is, what I will say is, there is, there is always continuity of memory. If you do your if you organize your session, well, there is continuity of recall. So therefore there is continuity of memory. You might say that memory doesn't die, but I don't really think that's the best way to describe it. I think memory is shattered and reconstitutes into it. I don't know of I don't know what doesn't die, but here's, here's something

John Dupuy  47:56  
is being purified, right? What is that? What is that that's being purified?

Chris Bache  48:01  
Well, I'd go farther and say, I think that in this process that life gives birth to individuality, not an ego, not a self, but life is giving birth to an individuality, and the nature that individuality matures and deepens as the soul matures and deepens, and as one's spiritual experiences deepen, my understanding, I mean the Vedanta traditions and many spiritual traditions basically believe that the individual is an illusion, and the goal is to shatter the illusion and to dissolve irretrievably into the oneness of all existence. I understand that cosmology, but I think it's a mistake, and it doesn't jive with my experience. My experience the universe is is very intensely interested in birthing an individuality and in aging that individuality and refining that individuality and maturing it so that in the end, we die, but we die in order to grow up, and we die again in order to grow up. In the end, this is what I call the birth of the diamond soul, that reincarnation basically is aging us stage by stage, level by level, helping us grow and to become more than we were, more than we were. But sooner or later, we reach a point where all of our former lives and all of the history, all the experiences and wisdom and mistakes we've made, all of it comes together into an integrated singularity. And as I've experienced that singularity, when I experienced that happen in my sessions, there was an absolute. I was catapulted into a state of awareness beyond anything I. Experienced up to that point in time. I was an individual, but I was an individual in pure Shunyata emptiness, condition, transparent, open to all existence. I was individual, but within a boundless existence, but I had my full memory intact, and I think that this is where the universe or the Divine is taking all human beings, that individuality is not the problem, separation is the problem. Ego, boundedness is the problem. Individuality is not the problem. Individuality is the great beauty. It's one of the great gifts that the Creator is giving us the opportunity to be an individual.

Roger Walsh  50:52  
Chris, can you draw a distinction there between the individual, individuality and separation? Let me see if I'm understanding individuality gives a sense of the recognition of of I can't come up with another word that into being individual, but separation usually is but, but the individual can be so there can be a sense of individuality within the recognition of one's innate connection with dependence on an ultimate unity with the all, or the pure consciousness. Is that? How you would distinguish from separation where there is a forgetting of the connection to the greater whole?

Chris Bache  51:36  
Yeah, I think when Buddhism teaches Shunyata and when it teaches anata no self, they are not they're basically defining a type of self experience where this we experience ourselves cut off from other selves, we experience ourselves as cut off and away from the universe itself. When that self dies, one experiences an individuality which is porous to others, and that is we live in compassion, and we experience an individuality which is in communion with surrounding layers and layers of consciousness, so that there is a spiritual openness and an openness of compassion to other beings. We are still an individual, but we are an individual that's situated within the boundaryless condition

Roger Walsh  52:44  
and so and it sounds as though I may take me a little moment to unravel this, but it sounds as though you're saying there's a value In that individuality. And I'm reminded of Ramakrishna, a great Indian mystic who was just extraordinarily fluid in his ability to roam through different realizations and states. And he described being lost in unity, but but then longing for separation so that he could worship and relate to the mother, so there were both sides there, and I hear something similar here. There are some traditions you pointed to, Advaita Vedanta, for example, where the where the self is regarded as an illusion, the fundamental reality is our inseparability, or is rather the Non-duality of existence. And yet it sounds like you're pointing to out of your own and here's the beauty of it, it came out of your own experience. You were aware of all these traditions, these ontologies, cosmology, metaphysics. And yet out of your own experience, it feels like you came to the sense that there is a beauty and perfection in the individuality in and of itself. Is that correct

Chris Bache  54:06  
it is? It is, and let me frame it this way, before the before time and space existed, before the physical universe existed, when everything was in the pure, fertile void condition when whatever you want to call the absolute made a choice to manifest physical existence. The physical universe is the only thing strong enough, I think, to shatter the the oneness. Of the absolute, into pieces that then can become individually awakened to what it is within the body of the Divine. So the the great gift of the physical universe, or one of the great gifts. Of the physical universe is literally the density that causes the oneness of the Divine to shatter into pieces, so that those pieces can become operational as Divine within the body of the Divine, and in that context, individuality, I think, is one of the great gifts of creation. It's one of the great gifts of of the universe. And I don't think the creator wants to destroy that individuality. After billions and billions of years of getting us to this point, finally, when we wake up and become conscious and we can drop our conscious down to source and understand and identify that part of us which is universal, which is oneness with all the universal, with what is alive. I don't think the intention is then to simply say, Okay, let's destroy that. I think we're growing, and I think we're going to be growing for billions and billions and billions of years more. We are just getting started in this process of waking up to the to the vast expanse of existence. And yet we're waking up in a way in which we become lovers of it. We become servants of it. We become a fractal embodiment of it. All these different metaphors for describing this mystery of the dance. Let me

John Dupuy  56:31  
just say that I've seen the same thing, and you expressed it much more eloquently. And I feel like I'm a yellow belt, you know, I'm talking to a 10th Don or something like that. But yeah, that somehow, in in the awe, the preciousness of the individual that is that infinitely more precious, at the same time, it's a yes, and it's this and that, and it's working itself out, and that's come through very clearly for me at times. And I had to rethink a lot of my ideas about psychology, given that and feels deeply human at a good at a deep level. And also, let me say what you were, what you were describing, is your experience, at some point, self awakens, okay? Dink, that just opens. That's just Jesus said a man must be born again. Well, what happens when you're born? You're just little helpless infant. You're not good for anything but being precious. And that's the beginning of the journey. And then it seems that you're talking about a Christ like or a Bodhisattva. Responsibility. At a certain point we have to take on responsibility, not just for own awaking, our own mistakes, our own suffering, but for for the all, for the collective. And that adds, I guess, the word is, a nobility to the task that otherwise would just be very narcissistic, if you will, and just very, you know, chasing your tail, but, but that, that understanding, that quality that you express at a deep, deep level is, I Think, is essential, and because we have the archetype of Jesus, of a human being whom an individual who was crucified and murdered in this most horrible way almost imaginable, who then goes down into the underworld and blah blah, but comes back still, him barely recognizable. Some of his disciples didn't. But at some level, a transformed level that has kept the rest of us running in his, you know, his path for a couple of 1000 years. But that's a story of the individual that's contained within our western our western treasure chest of wisdom stories.

Chris Bache  59:00  
Yeah, yeah. It is a story of divine incarnation come to fruition. And I think that story has archetypal ramifications that are much larger than the Christology that was developed to under to interpret it, which ended up making Jesus into a unique being when really he's a prototype,

Unknown Speaker  59:25  
beautiful, nice,

Roger Walsh  59:27  
and that that seems to be a major division that occurs in each of the great religions, and probably other many others as well, and perhaps reflecting different different developmental, psychological developmental stages on the people who make the interpretation the the the founder is either elevated to unique status which the rest of us can only approximate at best, or is recognized as an exemplar and. You called a prototype of the capacities and potentials latent within us. Seems a very important distinction you point

Chris Bache  1:00:09  
to the I want to mention that, as you said, John, when you begin to experientially tap into that in us, which is universal, then eventually all aspects of your life heats to to come in alignment with that. And that's why love is is you know, deep you know, not arrows, but agape, love and compassion, social justice, fairness, naturally arises as one. Spiritual practice deepens because you have discovered this hybrid nature within yourself. You are individually awake and awake to a universal bond, a universal level of reality that becomes an expression simply of your true nature. It's just spontaneous. And I also want to mention that I don't think you have you certainly don't have to go where I went in order to spiritually awaken, even if you wanted to use psychedelics or spiritual awakening. To me, there's three uses that I'd separate, using of psychedelics for healing, using of psychedelics to spiritually awakening. And then a third, which is what my journey became, a cosmological exploration. If I wanted to use psychedelics for simply spiritual awakening, I would recommend a protocol working with very low doses, because it's about dissolving the ego, and you got to get after where the ego lives in the world, and that's closer to time, space realities. You do not need to shatter time to become spiritually awakened. You don't need to enter archetype or reality. You don't need to go back to the beginning of the universe to become genuinely enthusiastically spiritually awakened. What I started kind of aiming at spiritual awakening, but the method was so powerful it shoved me in a way past that, or through that into a deeper, into a different agenda. And I'm entirely sympathetic to spiritual teachers who would say, you know, your time would be better spent cultivating on abiding the abiding presence of the transparent condition, then learning these, going on this quest to learn how the universe is put together in these different levels. And I understand that critique, and I I share it to a degree myself. I wonder sometimes whether I would have my time would have been better spent focusing more on the Enlightenment side of the things than the cosmic exploration side. But what happened in my work is that it pushed deeper into the cosmological exploration side.

John Dupuy  1:03:16  
Well, you said you were a philosopher, and you went with a philosopher's quest into this journey, and exactly what you said, and it's exactly what you did, so there's no flip flopping there,

Roger Walsh  1:03:32  
and you did it with a very specific aspiration and intention. Chris, I recall that you said before each session you would affect you effectively offer yourself as an instrument for the highest good of all, very similar to the Bodhisattva aspiration, or even reminded me of Jesus statement, not my will, but thine. It really felt like a an offer, an unrestricted offering of yourself as an instrument for for acquiring whatever wisdom you could was opened to you, or you were gifted or graced with in order to be an instrument of transmission to others. And it feels like your prayer was answered very clearly. And you talked about, well, you know, could have been as valuable to to just do spiritual practice. And perhaps, perhaps that's true, but, and it's kind of like, let 1000 spiritual flowers bloom. You can't. You gave us a new kind of flower, and we are benefiting from it. And who knows how many people, other other people will benefit from it. So wonderful that you did what you did, and beautiful that you did it with that aspiration and prayer. It feels like your prayer was answered.

John Dupuy  1:04:55  
Yeah. Chris, how do you what do you do these days? I. Mean to keep yourself, man, you went on the journey like you know, just remarkable, and you came back and you mentioned that you're teaching. Do you have a way of staying awake to everything that you were gifted, everything that you were shown, or do you find in the transmission and the teaching that that's what keeps you still crisp base in this limited reality, but at the same time, in touch with and transmitting what you learned on the other side, if you will?

Chris Bache  1:05:41  
You know, there's a question I ask in the book, what is the value of true but temporary knowledge? And I don't doubt that any of the experience that I had on my journeys was true, and I also know it was temporary, and it I cannot live in those places that the places where I've been, I can't the idea of bringing them back and integrating them as a stable state is that it may be true for certain levels of experience, but some of the deeper experiences not possible, at least not in, not in my present level of psycho spiritual development. I know that there are great beings who can, who are masters of these domains, and always they are the they are my guiding light. But I know that Chris's abilities are not cannot stabilize these states of consciousness in my present life, I use those experiences in order to I use them in my meditation practice. I use them in my vara practice. They are, they are the Samaya sattva that opens me to the Jnana sattva. So they are the being of practice. It opens me to the being of reality of these things. But I also have a certain a lot of my time these days is spent grounding, just being grounded, staying grounded, living in touch with the Earth, because I spent so many years out in the far reaches of the cosmos that it's good to be in touch with the earth and grounding on the earth. But most of all, I'm a teacher. I mean, I just, I love to find things and to share them. And during all the years when I was doing this work, I could not really share them. I really could not share them directly in my classes. Now, the first time I shared them was in dark night, early dawn, where I addressed experiences that had come up in the first half of my journey up to about the halfway point in LSD, in the mind of the universe, or what I prefer to call it, the name that it had for me in all the years I wrote it, diamonds from heaven. That's I shared the whole extent of the journey. But to me, the most important part of it all is the chapter on the birth of the future human and the final vision. What was because the work was so little focused on me and so much focused on the human family, it seemed it just became natural that, and I guess this is by some larger cosmic design, the story that kept being pounded into me and I kept it kept being shown over and over again, was the human story, where humanity is in its evolution, what we are coming to, the pivot point that we are coming in into in history, the absolute shift, which is taking place at an archetypal level, at really, at the plate tectonics of the art of the collective psyche, that we're coming to a tipping point where a tipping point that will change the condition of the human psyche at the collective level, not just an aggregate number of individuals, but there is a shift taking place underneath us, at the collective psychic level that is going to market a before and after in human history. This was shown me again and again, and then years later, I was taken, I was dissolved into the human species. I mean, I just dissolved without remainder, and then was taken into the death and rebirth of. Humanity, not in any details, not given details of when, exactly when, where or how, but that humanity was going to go through an epic, an era when it would completely lose control. All the assumed, all the assumptions of life were going to be stripped away. We were going to go through a crushing ordeal as a species, an ordeal that would be so terrible for time we would think that this is the end. We're going extinct as a species on this planet. But in my visionary experience, we come through this, we survive and we are absolutely changed in the process. When we come through this crisis, this long crisis, we have reached. We reached. Have reached something inside ourselves. We have cracked open our heart, we have cracked open our mind. The humanity that emerges from the historical period is a changed humanity. It is a deeper humanity. It is a more open and a more mature humanity. One of the ways putting together different things from my sessions, I've come to believe that this crisis that we're coming through with, a global systems crisis driven by a series of ecological crisis just tremendous converging forces that we are increasingly aware of these days. But this is a crisis of consciousness. We literally cannot afford to try to run this planet any longer as a at from the egoic level of consciousness, the the ego is separated, and it leads to a divided world. And I think what's happening is we're the soul is coming forward in history. I mentioned the diamond soul. I think we are literally growing up into our full soul being, and that we are coming to a point where, when we incarnate, we will never be tempted to identify just with this body, but we will know ourselves to be 100,000 year old being, and we will know that the planet that we are leaving is the planet that we will return to. We know we have these deep karmic connections with everyone around us, and we know that we are all embedded in the oneness of the divine consciousness. This is the magnitude of the of the transition that we're going through. And I think that all of us, in all of our spiritual practices, are contributing to this transition. And I think it's why so many people are having such very, very intense yogic practices and meditational practices and past life therapy practices, because there's this is tremendous unloading which is taking place, which is part of a collective healing, which is making way for this awakening of something new in history.

Roger Walsh  1:13:13  
Chris, you gave a beautiful description of one of the more well, there's so many profound openings and insights you had, but you did have a profound recognition of the possible future ahead of us as a human species, which you just summarized briefly, and and your insights are resonant with the sense that seems to be growing among many people that we Are Coming to a time of extraordinary crisis and opportunity. I think of that combination being very well expressed, perhaps best expressed by a mutual friend of ours, Dewayne Elgin, whose many books on on the transition we as a as a species, are facing, really point to current time as a bottleneck in which there is we really may face a, if not civilizational collapse, at worse than a loss of a lot of current capacities as a species and the death of many, many people. Yet also, he points to the possibility of this being could be, if we bring enough awareness, aspiration, pure heartedness, to the process, it could be a kind of collective rebirth. I'd love to hear you speak more about how the vision that seems to be emerging among a number of people with de this deep concern about our future meshes with your the insight you were given.

Chris Bache  1:14:48  
Yeah, new Wayne is a is a real brother in all of this, and I've been deeply and shaped or informed as I've digested my own experiences by his math. Methodical, combing through all the ecological data and the social data, looking at our the converging forces in history, through several of his books, i I can only speak, or I should only speak, out of my visionary experience, because I have, I have a certain familiarity second hand through people, authors like Dwayne and other writers of our time in history. But my sense of this is really informed primarily by my visionary experience. And so let me stay just there. And again I had this took place for me, these visions took place going back to 1990 through, 1995 96 so I was very ecologically uninformed 25 years ago, when these took place, I was not aware of the what's what's happening culturally and historically, as I have when I first had the experience of the death and rebirth of humanity. It took me about a year to recover from that experience, and I felt like I was, as I say in the book, I felt like I was walking around Hiroshima a week before the bomb was to be dropped, knowing what was coming with profound compassion and deep respect for all Human beings on the planet, knowing that they had all volunteered to participate in this grand exercise, and at a deep soul level, that they knew what was coming, even though, at an egoic level they may be did not know what was coming. It took me a year and a lot of work to stabilize. And ever since that time, through the early 90s, I've held this, this knowing in my body. I mean, it literally lives in my body, what's happening. And then as as I become more informed by the historians and by the ecologist and the environmentalist, and we really begin to see get a better hand a grip on global climate change and whatnot. It meshes, it seems to mesh very well with what the inner experience is, with the variance that there are some people who are serious students of the data who believe that we're not going to make it, the data is just so strong that we've already had our shot, and even though we're living on borrowed time and we will not make it through this transition, we are essentially extinct already, and all I can say is that, in my experience, that's not what happens and and it's it's not because the crunch that's coming is not as bad as we think it's going to be. It's going to bring us to our collective needs. It's going to be worse than we are now, even envisioning. It's going to just break us down completely.

Roger Walsh  1:18:28  
That's a very painful and probably very realistic vision. It sounds like, at least from what I understand, the data and and we come through, we come through,

Chris Bache  1:18:42  
we don't come through, but a new we is born. I believe that these historical pressures that are building are literally a birth. They are truly giving birth, and that to the future human. But then the question is, well, what will this future human look like, what is actually being born in history? What do we mean? Is this just more of an analogy or some what do we mean when we say it's a birth? And the way I understand this, I go back and I look at it through reincarnational lens. I mean, you know that I believe that reincarnation is a empirically demonstrated fact of life. Ian Stevenson and other scholars have just demonstrated that reincarnation is true. My first book on life cycles was about reincarnation the when I look at the universe, I see I see our planet pulsing in and out of time and space, reincarnating beings. I see us century by Century, millennia by millennia, beings reincarnating time and time again in giving birth, labor is very I mean gestation is long. The. Labor and birth is short and intense. I think the human family has been gestating the future human for hundreds of 1000s of years, we have been just dating the future in the dynamics of reincarnation. The labor that is taking place, I think, is a short, intense, convulsive period. But what we are giving birth to is already foreshadowed on once we understand the dynamics of reincarnation, what is coming forward, I think, truly, is the consciousness which holds all of our reincarnation experience as a simultaneous present. This is a consciousness that we all contact. If everything goes well, when we die, when we're born, we're contracted to small ego. When we die, we return to the soul. When we're born, we contract into another ego. When we die, we return to the soul that holds all of our memories, not fragmented, but integrated as a single being. If we keep this up over and over, sooner or later, the soul awakens inside human incarnation. I think that's the being that's being born in this historical crisis. Souls will live on this planet differently than egos live on this planet. I think all the great spiritual leaders of the Axial Age were all foreshadowing, were giving us teachings that were helping bring this about. They were all teaching us to think deep, to look deep, to feel deep, and to to allow the needs of others to become super ordinate to our own individual needs, but not canceling out. They were inviting us to live old, to live wide. And I think now, just as we are trying to become one planet, ecologically, politically, the world citizen is emerging that is being matched by something is taking place inside us. So as the world is trying to become one, we are trying to become one soul integrated within ourselves. And I think we're going to make it my experience, at least my visionary experience, is while nothing is nothing is decided, nothing is determined, predetermined. My experience is that we make it but this is not the end of the story. Of course, this is simply the next stage of human evolution. Human Evolution is going to continue as long as the universe is alive. So whatever we're doing now, it will be superseded eventually by yet another stage of in our development, in our spiritual development, but this is a particularly important stage right now.

Roger Walsh  1:23:12  
And Chris you in one sentence, I think you you elucidated a very important point, a kind of pivot point for this possible rebirth of the human species. You said, Nothing is predestined. It's up to us. So that's a big statement.

Chris Bache  1:23:35  
Yeah, yeah, it, I mean, if it's if everything were predestined, there would be no point to incarnating, right? Because if everything had to be the way it's got to be, then we wouldn't be learning. And if we're not learning, there would be no adventure here. So it is open ended. We could lose the planet. We could lose this opportunity. It's going to require our very, very best and our very deepest in order to come through this changed and built better.

Roger Walsh  1:24:13  
So from that perspective, then your vision may not be one of this is the way it's going to be. But rather, here is the possibility to which we can allow, we can open ourselves.

Chris Bache  1:24:30  
You know, yes, and I have to acknowledge that. I think this has happened. I think there are some times when people who nearly die part of their life review, they have a life preview, and sometimes what they and they see of the future which does come true, and sometimes they see a future which they can change. And I talk about this in the book Ken rings work heading toward omega. And so if they're seeing a future that they can change, they're seeing a conditional future. Future, not an absolute preset future. So I think what you're saying is true, that what I'm seeing is a possible future, maybe even a probable future, but a possible future that we still have to enact. So I say yes to that, and I have to add a post script. Some of my experiences have taken me so far into the future, into what I call deep time, not eternity, but into time, but a different modality of time, have taken me into the into deep time, and have given me an experience of this historical transition that humanity is making, not as a future event, but as a past event, as something that We have accomplished. So from that perspective, from that deep, cosmological expect perspective, if I were speaking from that voice, I would say, we will make this transition. Nature knows what it's doing. Nature has not brought us here unprepared. The genius of the universe that we see in DNA and galaxies, the genius that saturates every piece of the universe knows what it's doing when it brings us, when it to this particular critical turning point, we will make it. We will become more than we have ever been before.

Roger Walsh  1:26:44  
Beautiful, may it be so and and from my own perspective, which is not having had your visions, agnostic about the whether we'll make it or not, it seems like whatever perspective we hold, the only thing to do with our lives is to do what you did, to offer them in the service of human well being and survival. Is that congruent with your

Chris Bache  1:27:17  
absolutely well? It's going to take all of our, our very, very best efforts to move forward and to move forward deeply and with a deep heart, with an open mind, absolutely all, all hands on deck.

Roger Walsh  1:27:39  
Beautiful

John Dupuy  1:27:40  
Chris, I get, I get a feeling from you just, you know, my hit as a man who's heated the calls in his life. You went and you became educated, and you got all that part squared away in your life, so that later on, you'd be in a position much better position to share what you were called again, to learn, and you had the courage to keep it up, my God, that is a miracle in itself, over those 73 journeys and that that you're also at peace with yourself, because now you're giving back This vision, you did this work, and the work continues in the sharing of it, and that's a pretty good place to be.

Chris Bache  1:28:31  
Yes, it is a good place to be. It's always a good place to be when one comes to a point in one's life where one feels that one has done what was asked to be done, and then the rest is gravy. And now I'm in the situation writing the book. When I finished writing the book, I knew that I could, I could die at peace. That was the closure of the project. Now I'm in a new phase where I'm trying to figure out how to make what I did useful to other people. How can I serve other people carrying the knowledge or the memories that I have? How can I make it useful to people? And I'm still figuring that out. I don't I'm still trying to figure out how I can be useful to other people who are on their own spiritual path, on their own intellectual path, who are doing things I can't imagine doing wonderful things. How can I be useful to them, to support them in their process, as we enter this time in history?

Roger Walsh  1:29:52  
Beautiful and it sounds like that's a question that's really been with you and challenging you and I. Want to put it in a context, it seems like there are two different kinds of questions. There are knowledge questions, is it raining outside? Look outside? No. In the question. There are wisdom questions, which will seem more like cons are questions you can ask repeatedly. Each time you do. They take you deeper into the question, deeper into yourself, deeper into life. And sounds like this is your your wisdom question, or your sometimes called your sacred question, is now to the forefront in your life.

Chris Bache  1:30:31  
It is, and I know that when I have the opportunity to be with like minded spirits, like minded beings. And we talk about these things. I know that something happens inside me, that my shell is pretty thin anyway, but something happens and I get porous. And when I get porous, a larger knowing flows through me, works with me. I become irrelevant, but the teaching teaches itself in that way, and that's that's really why I wrote the living classroom, because this was happening in my classroom, I never, ever was able. I never talked about my psychedelic work to my students. I didn't bring it into the classroom. I built a firewall between my spiritual practice and my teaching work. But I found that the deeper I went into the consciousness of the universe. In my spiritual practice, the more it began to activate students in my classroom, the more there was an unconscious transmission, an activation taking place, which I had to learn how to manage and how to control, not control, but how to manage in order to keep everything safe for everybody in the classroom. So I've learned how that works. And I've learned that when you throw a stone into the lake, it naturally ripples out entirely. And so everybody, when we do steep, deep practice, naturally. People around us are going to be touched and are going to be influenced. So I know that when I when people's questions take me to reflect upon life in a way which is informed by my experiences, there is a gathering and a reinforcing that takes place between their psyches and my psyche, and together we become more and there is a transmission that sometimes happens, and a healing that sometimes happens that no one is in control of, and yet it seems to be the work. Now, what's happened since the book has come out, covetous has shut down personal contact of that sort, so that I've been in a period of incubation, and we're having lots of zoom meetings, and basically I've been incubating and trying to see where this is going, see where it wants to go. I'm about to begin a seven week online course on the book, which will give us another opportunity to push this a little bit farther. How much can we actually give this transmission online? I would rather be doing it in person, but right now, it's an online world.

John Dupuy  1:33:53  
Well, from where I'm sitting, it feels like it works

Roger Walsh  1:33:58  
pretty well. And Chris, what's the name of the course, so listeners can find it.

Chris Bache  1:34:03  
Well, it actually hasn't been given a name yet. This is on the shift network. The shift network is producing it. It's going to be on LSD in the mind of the universe. But we haven't settled on a name. It might it may be called diamonds from heaven. It may be called a spiritual journey into the mind and heart of the universe, but it'll be on shift network starting the middle of November, and it starts November 30.

John Dupuy  1:34:34  
Chris, do you find that people are responding such as it is, given the times that we live in are, how's it going? Are the books selling? Are your people going, Oh my God. Have you met any fellow travelers who maybe had similar, you know, experiences and note, I mean, from my experiences, what you're saying really corresponds and deepens and fills out the. What I've learned in my own journey, in my own life. So how's it going?

Chris Bache  1:35:05  
It's going just as you say, there's nothing unique about my experiences. It's just it's in a it's in a group of all of our collective experiences that pushes the boundaries in certain ways. But I've had many people write me and say, I you know you've you've clarified what my experience has been. Here's what I've experienced around this topic. And I've had many people write and say, I've never touched psychedelics in my life, but I've had many experiences that are completely in alignment with your experiences. Let me explain to you my experience, and it's so it's clearly, this is, this is a large pattern that's coming up within the collective psyche as a whole, and it's been a joy. It's a joy to share and then to enter into conversation with other journeyers. What's important is not any one person's experience. Clearly, what's important is the in this case, the psychedelic experiences are the psychedelic and spiritual experiences of the entire human family. When we put all of our experiences on the table, then we can sort out which ones are not essential, or which ones are idiosyncratic, and find the ones that are universal and are more epistemologically valuable. And to do that, we have to put all of our experiences on the table. So for me, I'm simply putting my experiences on the table in dialog with other people as we all put our experiences on the table, and then we begin a conversation of those experiences. And I think we're still in the early stages. I mean, I think the book you edited Roger of the early psychedelic elders, you know that work was putting a certain generations insights on the table, and I think it's beginning again. The tricky part right now for me, as people absorb my work is the focus of the psychedelic Renaissance is psychedelic therapy, and that's exactly where it should be, healing the human psyche, careful control studies, lots of brain wave maps, you know, and all that stuff. And very, very careful control studies. And to a certain degree, my work rocks that boat, because it's, it's doesn't follow that protocol. It uses extreme doses, high doses, it's using a very, very powerful chemical which doesn't lend itself to healing as much as well as MDMA or a Psilocybin. And so there's a certain tension, I think, between the therapeutic focus of the present, very important work being done, and in my work, and yet, there is a huge underground psychedelic community which is not waited for a scientific validation. And this community, I think is been having a conversation among itself for many, many years. And I think my work is being received very well. Yeah, in that community,

Roger Walsh  1:38:35  
beautiful, yes, and and you spoke of, you know, you're still exploring the next question. You spoke of a period of some years, I think, 20 years of assimilating these experiences. So, so it sounds like the process, process of integration, has been very long and has had its own challenges, and perhaps that's not a topic that's given enough attention. In spiritual circles, there's a lot of focus on doing the practices and opening the particular states of consciousness and insights, but but not so much, perhaps, on the very essential work of integration, which is an assimilation of the experiences or reflection on them, or recognizing their implications, dialoguing about them in community, anything which allows us to come to a broader understanding of their implications and possibilities and to and and their implications for how best, how Now should we live?

Chris Bache  1:39:44  
Yes, yes. There is a book that's just been published called psychedelics and psychotherapy that is a collection really focuses on this issue of integration. I have an article in it, very important. I think that we're getting past the stage where the excitement over being able to break through to these dimensions of consciousness is kind of calming down, and we're beginning to realize that the real issue is, what do we do with these experiences? How can we hold them? How do we integrate them? How do we integrate them individually in small community. And how do we integrate them intellectually, so that we shift the paradigm of the reality that we're living within that and of course, psychedelic experiences support the paradigm of a living universe, that the universe is not dead matter, but the entire universe is alive. It supports the paradigm of an intelligence, orders and orders and orders of intelligence that lie behind and within physical existence. So there's so many levels to it, and I would offer my own experiences, some of what not to do. I mean, I'm deadly serious when I say I think I pushed myself harder than was wise at the end, when I was this, the chapter that was the hardest chapter in the book to write was the last chapter coming off the mountain where I reflect upon the years after I stopped my sessions, took me a year just to write that chapter. I thought I paid a lot of attention to integration throughout my work. I wrote all my sessions down. I did a lot of spiritual practice throughout and even though I couldn't teach this stuff, I had it in conversation with my partner at the time, and I really I paid a lot of attention to individual integration. I wrote the living classroom to reflect tell the story of how I took care of my students who were being touched by the work so social integration. So I thought that when I stopped these sessions, I would be able to step away and I would live with the bounty of the extraordinary gifts that I had been given, and the most important of which, which emerged in the last five years of the work we haven't talked about yet, but the diamond Luminosity sessions that those particular immersions into Dharmakaya the clear light of absolute reality. But what I found was that in the years following. In five or six years following my sessions, when I stopped, I had entered what I call the deep sadness. It was a period of withdrawal into a loneliness from not being able to return to such ecstatic experiences of being dissolved into light, literally just into light. I knew that I needed to stop. I had for reasons I touched. I knew it was important for me to stop. I had to spend years absorbing what I had. But there was such an unfulfilled longing to return to those dimensions of reality that I found I reached a point where I realized I was just waiting to die. I was taking care of my children. I was taking care of my students. I was not suicidal. I was living a balanced life, but in my heart, I was just waiting to die, and I with more time, I realized something's wrong here. This is not the way this work is supposed to end. This is not I made a mistake. Somewhere along the way, I made a mistake, and I began to wonder, is it possible to have too much God? But I knew the entire physical universe was God. I knew that the Divine is everything that exists. So it's not a matter of having too much God, because I knew God was I was living inside God. So what was the mistake? And eventually I came to see that the mistake was not too much divine of the Divine, but it was too much Transcendence. There is a balancing act between transcending time and space and being embodied inside time and space, and there are truths in each of these realities. And I had plunged myself so deeply beyond time and space, so many times into such intimacy with that which supports time and space that I lost my bearings, I lost my foothold inside time and space, and I had to, so I made an absolute decision to ground myself. Inside time and space, and to let what I had experienced in these subtle states of consciousness, to let it work its way into me, I had to literally not alter my consciousness so that these states of awareness could enter into my physical being. Whereas previously it had entered into my altered being, now it had, if it was ever going to enter into my physical body, I had to sit still and let it come to me. Because, as you know, in these states, nothing in reality changes. We don't do anything. We simply wake up to something that's always been there. It's always been there. And I reached a point where I simply had to sort of be patient and let this transformation take place. And so in a sense, on the one hand, there's nothing more for me to do, and on another hand, yeah, there's something more to me for me to do.

Roger Walsh  1:46:09  
Yeah. And you're talking now about a very interesting topic. You're talking about the traps that can go with this kind of deep work, and usually we talk about traps on the spiritual path or with psychedelics. Similarly, we usually talk about the earlier paths, the traps of being overwhelmed, of fear, of terror, of acting out certain psychodynamics of ego inflation, taking these experiences to be proof of our unique Transpersonal nature and specialness, and yet you're pointing to some of the traps that can occur significantly further along. It sounds like you're talking about about, well, you one way of framing what you just said, this deep sadness or losses would, of course, be, and you do this in your book. I think the in terms of the dark night of the soul of St John of the Cross, the the challenge that comes when we taste something so Transcendence, so divine, so inspiring, and then lose that contact in a way. And you're talking about the some of the traps that can come with the sheer amount of energy coursing through one's body and the and the the possibility of transmission as a result and and and of being seduced by those capacities. So, so this is a very this is another kind of gift you're giving us pointing out, giving us the beginnings of a map of the more advanced traps that can come

Chris Bache  1:47:55  
the traps that happen when everything goes right, deficiency, but when everything goes right, you can have too much of a good thing. I found I didn't know that at the beginning.

Roger Walsh  1:48:07  
Is it too much, or is it our attitude towards it?

Chris Bache  1:48:12  
I think you can have too much of a good thing in the sense that I think in every one lifetime, most of us, we can only integrate so much and productively, and I think it's possible to bite off more than we can really thoroughly chew. And sometimes I think I bit off more than I could, more than was wise for me to chew. And but you're all absolutely right. There are so many pitfalls on this path, ego inflation, thinking you're special because you've had a special experience, and it's so important to stay grounded, really grounded, grounded, grounded, so that all of these things wash through you. And my wife was, was very good at helping me remember, always, always, what's important is not what happens on the day of your session. What's important is what you can do the day after your session. It's, it's that you it is how you live your life in the world, carrying the insights that you've had as best as you can into your fallible life, and recommitting yourself to purifying your life of all of its all of its you know, messy Garbage, and living a clean and compassionate and proper life that that continues just because you become one with God, what happens is, I don't actually these days, I don't know why anyone would want to become one with God, because once you do that, it triggers enormous purification processes that don't stop. Up. I mean, it's just it goes on and on, you know, it just deepens. Yeah, there are lots of ways for this path to go wrong,

Roger Walsh  1:50:12  
and yet, there was something which, in the in the way you approach this, that allowed you, I not there were ways you got caught, but they weren't the gross ways they weren't you didn't harm others you. But there were subtle ways in which you get you've got caught, such as the dark night of the soul, but you always you worked your way out of it. What do you what do you attribute that to?

Chris Bache  1:50:48  
I contribute. I attribute that to good company, the people I was with my former wife, Carol. We were married for 24 years. She is the mother of all my children. She was my sitter for all my sessions. She never did a session herself. She is a very serious varana practitioner. She has since gone on to complete her three year retreat. So she's, she's a lama, acknowledged as such, and she was a great help keeping me grounded during all these years when I was, you know, going in and out of the universe. My teaching, just my children, kept me grounded. Teaching kept me grounded, but studying the great masters, because the more I studied the great masters, the more it showed me my own imperfections. It All. It showed me what I was not by looking at their greatness. And so I never, I could never take myself. They kept me honest with myself as I went my students kept me honest because, you know, I I had to earn a living teaching at an open enrollment University, and I'm walking into a classroom filled with people, many of them who don't want to be there, and I have to kind of trick them, persuade them to be interested in some of the things that we're going to be studying here. It's hard work. I was not teaching graduate students. I was teaching an open enrollment University for people who are going to college for the first time. So it was just good, hard, honest work that kind of kept me focused and gave my body and my mind time to absorb the enormity of what came forward. But eventually, eventually, the second thing I deal with in that chapter of coming off the mountain is what I call the sickness of silence, and that's the isolation of doing psychedelics in a psychedelic phobic society where psychedelics are illegal, where you cannot, even if you can share them in small groups, you cannot share them professionally. I'm a teacher, I'm a public person. I could not share my experiences psychedelic I literally had to retire from my work as a philosopher of religion before I could begin my real my deepest work as a philosopher of religion. That's the iron. Yeah, that, in fact, I retired a little early, precisely to give me enough time to write this book, to do this work, and as I began to to be honest publicly in the writing of the book, this boy, it took me a long time. It took me before I wrote the book. It literally took me about three years just to get myself into the psychological position where I was willing to let people this deep into this part of my life, and the only way I was able to do that was to truly let go and remind myself over and over again these experiences were not given to me for me. They were never part of they were never private. They were never given to me for me. They were always given to me to share, to help the human community as a whole. So by let taking myself out of the picture and just sharing visions without owning them in a sense, or appropriating them, they were never private visions that made it easier for me to release them and let them, let them have their impact without owning that impact myself,

Roger Walsh  1:54:56  
and there was so many experiences which brings up a. Of another topic, and that is if we look across the great religious traditions and, of course, other traditions as well, which haven't had such a major impact, we almost always find a worldview and understanding that there is some final experience towards which we are working, and we get that final experience, and then it's, you know, bliss and roses wasn't exactly what you found. And there aren't, it seems like there was an endless opening for, always, for the possibilities that that you open to, and there aren't, to my limited knowledge, there aren't a lot of examples of that. I think the best, the best in our own time. Maybe the teacher amid or Almas is the pen name he writes under, and his two most recent books, runaway realization and the alchemy of transformation, he he spent decades with profound study and a kind of spiritual genius opening to opening an enormous number of states. And then he built up this extraordinary, sophisticated psycho spiritual map of the progression of states and ways of working with them. And then recently, he stepped off his own map and said, No, there's nothing. Yeah, you can see a progression and there's no final goal. Every opening is merely a port. Can be, can be, merely a portal to another opening, and it, and he has a statement in there which probably only a handful of people on the planet could make. He said, Yeah, I've been enlightened many times, and every time everyone someone says, oh, that's the final experience. But I always find there's something more, and that seems your experience.

Chris Bache  1:57:04  
It is, I think, and I think it's, it's particularly the experience when you use, mean, this is a path of temporary immersion, the path of temporary I mean, all of our practices are temporary, but this psychedelic path, particularly is a temporary path, and that's the temporariness is what makes it tricky. But I like you, I thought I was doing this path in order to get to an end state, that there would be a goal I know when I would reach it, it would solve all my issues, or because people describe as becoming one with God, or becoming dissolving into the meta, cosmic void. And what I found was that actually I became one with God or one with mind of the universe many times. And there, there are many gradations or many levels of oneness with God, and there are even levels of the primal void. There are levels of void in the universe. Eventually, there were many levels of Homecoming, of homecoming and peace and reunion and just relaxing into the the bliss of return. And when the diamond Luminosity opened, 15 years into the work, when, when the diamond Luminosity opened, and I entered this hyper, hyper Clear, clear, just unbelievably clear. Level of awareness. And in the next four years, I only in 26 sessions. I only touched this reality four times, lots of purification, lots of cleansing, lots of four times. The second time I touched it was the 50th session, and I was as deep into the universe as I would ever go. I was far beyond time and space. I was dissolved completely into this ecstasy of the pure Luminosity. And then my visual field pivoted 90 degrees, and I saw reality far in the distance, filled with a light, an even greater light than the diamond Luminosity, light, and a ray of light hit me from that reality, and it absolutely shattered me, and took me 10 minutes to recover from it. And that's when I that's when it sunk in that it's an infinite progression. It. There isn't a matter of coming to an ending spot. You stop. You come to an ending stop when you simply can take it no longer. You can take the ecstasy, no longer you can take the cycle of death and rebirth, no longer. It's an endless progression. It's an endless progression, and that's one of the reasons I would be gentler with myself if I were to do it again, I recommend others. It's not about reaching an end state. It's about opening up, letting all this wisdom in, letting the beauty in, letting the healing in, going through the purification process and becoming a little more alive, a little more conscious and in the dance of life, in the dance of the universe, but it's not about reaching any end state.

Roger Walsh  2:00:52  
And you you had that recognition there was always more and and the always more required something of you, it required a another level of purification, free for each taste of that, something more. And you just alluded to what you called the diamond illumination, which, in some ways, I mean, I hesitate to put any, any differential value on these things, but in some ways, felt like one of the most impactful of all experiences that you had, and something which left you, as I recall, you said in the Book that that for this you would gladly die so and you relate the you, what you called the diamond illumination, to the experiences described as the culmination point in in some other traditions. I just be lovely to have you expand on on give us a feel for this realization, whatever extent you can, of course, and for how it relates to the goals of other traditions.

Chris Bache  2:02:12  
Well, as I understand it, the reality that I was taken into in those four sessions is a reality that's outside of the Bardo it is extra Samsara reality. It's outside of time space, and what I call the echoes of time space, Bardo reality, what happened in the first two times I went into this condition, I was taken deeper and deeper into it. I had the encounter with what I call the absolute light, which showed me that it's an infinite progression. Then the next two times I went into it, this diamond Luminosity began to crunch itself deeper and deeper into my physical being. I wasn't going out. It was coming in. So it literally was crunching itself into my psyche, into my body. It felt like it was changing me at a cellular level, and eventually, at the very end of my journey, it changed my my perception had changed, my how I see things, literally, physically, how I can see things, not permanently. It gave me a temporary experience that I call diamond vision. I was seeing 100 1000 times more sharply, more clearly than I would have ever seen before. And at that point, I realized that I was seeing through the eyes of the future human. I was seeing in a way that all humanity will one day see, that all of our senses, sight, touch, taste, all of our senses, are being elevated and animated to higher and higher levels, the more consciousness we can internalize in our body. So this crunching into me is actually an acceleration of something which is taking place more slowly for all of us in our reincarnation, evolutionary reincarnation process, and that's the message I got at the end of my sessions, was that one of the reasons I had to stop my sessions was the whole movement now was no longer going out and into the whole movement was the that which is out, coming into me, coming in deeper, deeper into me. And I literally had to stop my sessions in order to let this process reach its end stage. Reaches its natural conclusion when I reflect on. On the diamond Luminosity condition, the parallel and I draw parallels to the spiritual traditions that I'm familiar with, the ones that stand out. Of course, all the spiritual traditions speak about light. All of the reincarnational traditions speak about extra Samsara, reality, the clearest description I've I've come across are in the Buddhist traditions whose text I know the best, and their description of Dharmakaya, the clear light of absolute reality, the clear light which is the I

Chris Bache  2:05:48  
that which is the seed reality out of which all existence emerges, that which is the love, out of which all emotion, all love emerges, that which is the pure, distilled power out of which all energy of Creation emerges in its absolute, transcendent, hyper, clear, clear, clear form, containing everything within it and nucleus and yet, something which is beyond creation itself truly, I understand why touching that reality even once undoes centuries of living in the shadows of karma. Karmic vision is always shadowed, and it's always approximate. It's always conditioned. But to touch something which is so profoundly unconditioned, and then slowly the task, I think, is to slowly shape one's life so that one can live the conditioned existence in abiding communion with that which is unconditioned to live the light in one's physical manifestation, something I have just getting started. I have so much to learn in that process. I'll never be able to, never be able to conclude this during this one lifetime. But my belief is, what the universe seems to have promised me, is that when I die, I will return to that condition, that there is nothing I need to do between now and when I die, to return to that condition, and if I meet any obstacles along the way, if anything arises which would prevent me from returning to that essential truth, I have learned how to dissolve those obstacles by taking any obstacles into me until eventually they dissolve of their own of their own weight.

Roger Walsh  2:08:07  
What a wonderful vision and and something which clearly, even as you were counted now, I could see you going into your own experience and being deeply, deeply touched by it, even now, 2030, years later. So it's an exquisite example of the way in which these experiences touched and incarnated in and as you and still have their resonance and and and impact and transmission, I felt palpably touched by by the qualities of qualities that that you were expressing out of your in your description, given out of your direct experience, which felt partly out of your direct experience in this moment and a very exquisite transmission. And you also spoke of, once more, of the idea that these awakenings, the recognitions of these remarkable realities, are not the end point that that there's a that's a stage. But beyond that is the integration, the bringing it, allowing it to incarnate in and through us. And you pointed to what you called the diamond vision, and you mentioned that the diamond illumination was most resonant view with the Tibetan Buddhist tradition. And interestingly, the Tibetan Buddhist tradition speaks further of of a stage beyond that which it feels like you're illuminating of of pure perception or recognition, in which one's perception is so transformed by this realization that. One sees this world not as some merely mundane material reality, but as an expression of that diamond illumination. One sees sacred beings. One sees it as what's called a pure a pure land optimized for awakening, and expressive of awakening. So they call it the pure perception. I'm not telling you anything you don't know, of course, but might be not. Might be interesting for our listeners to know that your description not only of the awakening to the diamond illumination, but its very effects on you, something that is recognized and highly valued in certain traditions. Yeah, truly,

Chris Bache  2:10:47  
there is nothing unique in any of my journey. In any it, I'm simply rediscovering things which many, many people in many traditions have already discovered that the technology may be a little bit different, but the core understanding of existence, the core truths, the core insights, have been with us for a long, long time, embodied by Great Beings, passed along generation by generation by Great Beings. There's really nothing. There's nothing unique in my work.

Roger Walsh  2:11:28  
And you you open to a two experiences that others have opened to, and you had your own unique constellation. And you bring to it something which is unique, your own gifts as a philosopher and theologian. So. So once again, it's the yes and

Chris Bache  2:11:58  
something that the mother told me at the end and when I was really not sure what to do with all of this and what the mother, which for me, you know, my my naming of the Absolute, tends to run in the feminine direction. I see myself as a servant of the Great Mother, and I see all physical existence as the embodiment of the Great Mother, and the transcendent divine as more male, and the embodied Divine is more female. But what the mother said was simply let them see me as you have seen me. That's all just let me. Let them see me as you have seen me. They'll know what to do with it. It will serve them in ways that you cannot anticipate. Just let them see me. And she was very clear. She said, You know, you didn't give yourself these visions. You didn't decide what visions you were given on any particular day you were not you did. Had no control over when you were broken and when you were nourished. We did that. None of this is of your doing. It was all our doing, and you have no right to hold on to any of it. And I think this feeling is a feeling that spiritual beings, or people who have given themselves over to intimacy with the universe, have always felt that their practice is not their own, and the fruition of their practice is not their own, and they have no right to hold on to their fruition of their practice, because it's in the very nature of the of the awareness that the divine serves all. The Divine is all and in the end, it's the mother speaking to her children. It's the mother's love for all of her children, and it's the mother's desire to wake up all of her children, which is the driving force of it all.

Roger Walsh  2:14:10  
And I was, I was struck by your description then, which echoed a theme in the book, that when you when you were portraying the communications you receive from very profound realms of consciousness and being that you did it as did it in the plural, first person plural, we have given you these gifts, and I think it's reminded me very much, as you pointed out, the Quran, where Allah speaks as in as we

Chris Bache  2:14:48  
Yeah, yeah. And I don't think, I don't think it's a plural, like a polytheism, it's a plural, like, just vast. I mean, just. Just unable to wrap our minds around it so enormous that that it swallows our capacity to describe or to concretize, and somehow we speaks to that more effectively than I. I think sometimes, no matter how profound this our if we were to take the greatest spiritual geniuses of our generation, and truly just the great, great masters of our generation, and if we could go forward 500,000 years, or however many 1000 years, we would imagine, the great masters of that generation will be able to see more, will have deeper experiences still, because there is a certain sense in which the experience of any individual is kept within, in certain sense, the capacity of the herd, they push the edge, but they're limited by the capacity the collective psyche. But as the collective psyche evolves, it extends the limit of the individual spiritual genius. So it's it's an ongoing, ever unfolding, ever progressive deepening of this rapport between the creative intelligence and we who are the result of that creative intelligence.

Roger Walsh  2:16:34  
Yes, and, and I'm going to ask you to I'm going to ask a question which is going to, of course, impossible. We need another few sessions, but, but has to be asked. And that is, after all these experiences, these openings, these gifts and graces, and ones which had very dramatic impacts on your understanding of yourself, why you were doing this, the nature of reality, which exploded your understanding not once, but many times. And that was one of the things I found in the book and even in our dialog now, recognizing my own limiting presuppositions such as, yeah, you know, these chemicals are good for psychotherapy and healing on an individual level, but no, you were forced to the recognition, kicking and screaming all the way I would say, to a larger recognition that this was potentially about a healing of collective consciousness and more and always more. So obviously, in a in a reality in which there's always more, there can be no definitive map. But how would you describe to the extent you can your understanding of the of the nature reality, how would would? How would you characterize or point us towards your worldview at this time? Yeah,

Chris Bache  2:18:27  
I'll do my best to answer your question and to not weep as I do so,

John Dupuy  2:18:35  
go ahead and weep if you need to.

Chris Bache  2:18:48  
I see the universe as a magnificent as the as as pure genius, as saturated with genius and saturated with with the geniuses ambition, the creative impulse, I see the birth of stars and the birth of galaxies and the birth of planets and the birth of species and the birth of an intelligent a self aware species within some of the planets and a reincarnating species within this Planet, all as acts of profound genius, of just unspeakable genius and and love, because it is the sharing of existence. It is the the gestating of the conditions that make infinite progression possible. I see death and rebirth. I see reincarnation. I see the Bardo. I see this vision that when we die, we don't simply wink into this we go into a very specific great, great gradated series of levels of. Existence that reflect our limits and our capacities. I used to think of the Bardo as kind of the the the the enemy or the opposition. It was a cloud getting in the way. But now I'm beginning I see it as the compassionate blanket. It keeps us safe as we enter into deeper and deeper communion with the true power. I will call it the divine. I don't like to call it the divine, though I use this language sometimes, but because our concepts of the Divine and of God are so childlike, are so childish compared to the reality itself. But to become to touch that power until we are fully formed and capable of withstanding the intensity of that reunion, it would shatter us. It would just absolutely shatter us. We have to be very, very strong and very congealed as an individual before we can touch that reality and stay conscious and coherent within the reality, that reality, and that's just the level of reality outside the Bardo of this particular piece of time and space. So I don't know what lies beyond the Dharmakaya. I don't know what lies in the absolute dimension. But everywhere that I have journeyed and everywhere I have seen, there is genius arising. There is purposeful intent, not not an easy to recognize purposeful intent, sometimes a very, very hard, complex, subtle, purposeful intent. But it's there behind everything. It's there. It's always there. It's always pressing for more and uplifting us all. And in saying what I've been saying, you know, I'm just echoing, echoing the teachings of the great spiritual lineages of the great teachings. There's nothing original in what I'm saying. I'm simply echoing, not what I've been taught, but I'm echoing teachings that I have seen elsewhere, that it's all alive, It's all

Chris Bache  2:22:36  
and the depth of love that holds existence is proportionate to the depth of the genius that is orchestrated existence that was one of the hard things for me to take in, that the genius I could see, but the love that's proportionate to that genius. I've become much more bhakti in this process than I had, than I had ever thought that I would be. It's just, it's just

Chris Bache  2:23:17  
impatient patient. Wake Up Now, wake up in 100,000 years. Wake up in a million years. It doesn't really make that much difference to the Creator, because it doesn't think in the short term. She thinks in the long term. She thinks in the long term, and she doesn't think about individuals. She thinks about all of us. She thinks about the entire planet, the entire galaxy, the magnitude of

Chris Bache  2:23:58  
as far as I've gotten in all of this work, I've just touched the edges. Just touch the edges.

Roger Walsh  2:24:08  
Thank you so much, Chris again, that was a true transmission of the not only the magnitude and the genius, but of the heart. Like Words fail, heart chattering, heart, boundlessness of love that you saw. And what is, what is inspiring Is that is that, yes, you, you keep saying in true humility that there's nothing new in what you saw, but the fact that you did see it, that you are reporting your own experience, that this is direct phenomenology, not some out of some text out, but this is what you found in your direct experience. And it echoed. Because the discoveries of the great saints and sages throughout human history, and it also echoes the findings of other deep explorers, which which Stan Grof put together in his book The cosmic game, where he took the deepest insights of the 1000 people he'd worked with and welded them into a synthesis, a a cosmology, an ontology, a metaphysics, which was remarkably similar to some of the findings, the great traditions, and I think was most synchronous, most congruent of all, with Kashmir Shaivism, the very profound mysticism of India. So yes, from one perspective, we can say, yeah, you just saw what's been reported umpteen times. No big deal. Why'd you waste your time writing a book? On the other hand, Thank you, Chris. This is a new way, the fact that we have a we have a an integrated report of these truly trans, egoic, Transpersonal, trans everything openings from a different modality is very affirming of perennial wisdom and perennial insights, so nothing is left out.

John Dupuy  2:26:27  
You include the all somehow. And I was thinking, it's like this guy's telling me about the burning bush, and I smell the smoke beautiful, and holding on to your humility and your your your humanity and coming back and being a human being, you know, is such a gift, brother. Thank you so much.

Roger Walsh  2:26:49  
Indeed, indeed, there's, there's one more theme I want to point bring back, or actually just point out that's been underlying so much of what you've you've said, you've talked about being guided, being taken into, being offered, being graced by an intelligence and love far Beyond the passes all understanding and and and what I take from that is something that resonates deeply from my own much more mundane explorations and from reading great psychologists and therapists and other psychedelic explorers. And that is we live, usually, the vast majority of humankind lives at war with their own their own minds, deeply distrusting of their own psyches and themselves. And yet, the deeper we go, the more we discover what you discovered, that we can trust ourselves, that given, when we open open as fully as we can, we find that our minds are not these malevolent cesspools of pain and trauma and and malevolence. Yes, there are those, some of those elements and bits we have to have to be willing to face, but there's so much more and that when treated well, when treated well, our minds are self healing, self actualizing, self correcting, self transcending, yeah, and That's that leads to this profound trust, both in ourselves and in the greater reality.

Chris Bache  2:28:46  
Yes, absolutely, you say it very well, self correcting, self healing. We all have knots. We're all born with knots. We bring in garbage from a previous lifetime, lots of previous lifetimes, but when we bring our awareness, when we bring those knots into awareness, they open, they untie themselves. When we bring our pain into awareness, it heals itself, itself. It clarifies and then, as as those shadows lighter, as lightness, we get clear and clear and relax them. Then the genius of our being shows itself more easily, more strongly. And then the wonderful discovery is that there is no membrane, ultimately, no absolute membrane between our individual existence and the existence of the universe itself that we just drop right through. And so the awareness that bubbles up inside our individual life and the awareness which is bubble. Growing up around life around us in totality and in my neighbors, and in each other and in the planet, it's the same life. It's not a separate life. So and that's when, you know, I think when we begin to really understand existence, then we can relate to the beauty of the universe and own it as a reflection of our beauty, because if we don't understand reincarnation and we don't understand how life works, we're always going to be estranged from the magnificence of a beautiful sunrise and sunset or the stars at night. But as we get clearer, everything begins to become simpler, more transparent, and that's just as you say, We're self healing, self clarifying, self arising.

Roger Walsh  2:31:00  
Wow, Chris, you've given us such an incredible gift, and I know that you are very aware that this is not your gift, and that you're you are the instrument through which this gift has come and that's the aspiration with which you entered this very intense, decades long investigation, and yet, all because of that, this is an extraordinary transmission you're offering unique, yes, re esperannial discoveries, and yet unique in its own form and time and the capacity for contextualizing within the best of our contemporary knowledge and understanding of the great tradition. So it's a priceless, just a priceless gift. And I think John bowed to you before I bow to you. We both, both bow and and you, you'll let the bow go through you.

Chris Bache  2:32:07  
Gentlemen, I know enough of each of your work to know who I'm with here, and I bow to you deeply because I know that all of all three of us have been working these fields for a long time. All three of us have been nurtured by the wisdom and had been contributing to the wisdom. So I the vow is returned, brothers, truly, truly is

Roger Walsh  2:32:30  
thank you. And that's the way it is in in the spiritual traditions, one vows, we bow to each other, recognizing who, who we really are. Chris, is there anything you'd like to say that by way of completion,

Chris Bache  2:32:51  
first I'd like to say thank you. I become more whole. I become healed and more whole when I get to speak about these things, then I get to do what I was designed to do. And there are still not that many places where I get to have the conversation that you pulled for me today, that we had together today. So I want to say thank you, and I'd like to add as a footnote. If there were one gift that I wish I could give people straight out of my experiences here, it would be the gift of letting go of the fear of death, just letting go of the fear of death. If you're afraid of death, you have life turned upside down. This is where the hard work is done. This is where we do the really hard work. Death is we have so many stupid ideas about what happens to us when we die. Death is the great liberation. Death is even the partial liberation. Is a great liberation. Death is joy. Death is return. Death is to return again to the arms of the Beloved. To be born is the beginning of the hard cycle. To die is the end of the hard cycle, the beginning of the easy part of the cycle.

Roger Walsh  2:34:19  
That's that's a wonderful flip on our conventional understanding. Chris, well, I'm just going to repeat myself. What a gift. But I want to, I want to close by mentioning again your books, the several dark, night, early dawn. Subtitle steps to a deep ecology of mind. You wrote about your teaching experience and how to how teaching can be a transmission in the book for living classroom. And most recently, the and book we've been primarily focusing on today is the extraordinary book, Ellen. LSD and the mind of the universe. LSD and the mind of the universe, and both John and I, I don't think we can recommend it highly enough. We've both been inspired by it. Chris, it's been a sheer delight to be able to do this dialog and these explorations with you. Thank you so much for on our behalf, and also on behalf of all our listeners and all the people who who you're touching in so many ways. Deep gratitude. Thank you so much. Thank you. This has been deep transformation, self, society, spirit, talking with Chris Bache, you you.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
