Speaker 1  0:12  
Hi everybody, welcome.

Rachel Fleming  0:17  
Lovely to see you wherever you are in the world, it's a beautiful evening here in Devon, England, so thank you so much for joining us tonight. You could be out in the sunshine, but it's lovely to see you. And welcome to anyone who is watching on the recording, and I think there will be quite a few of those. So we are talking about contemporary animism tonight. This is a talk in our contemporary animism program. We are really delighted to show you an interview that we did some time ago with a chap called Chris Bache Colin. Is going to introduce him a bit more in depth, but just to say that he took part in our contemporary animism Confluence back in February, and we just thought that what he had to say was just so hopeful at a moment when we as a species, as a community of species, are looking at a fairly dark night of the soul with all the climate change news and social crises, and it just seems that that Chris's vision is just one of hope, and we really hope you'll enjoy it. What we're going to do tonight is basically play you the interview. It's quite heady. I'll just warn you, there's a lot of talking, and it goes for about 15 minutes. And what we'd really like to do is for you to watch it, to go in and out of it as you like, and then to stay with us for 1015, minutes afterwards, if you're interested, to and just share some of your feelings, the stuff that might have come up for you as you were watching it, just to See whether you Yes, you like it, whether you're excited as us, or whether it's not for you. So without further. ADO Colin, can I, can I ask you to introduce Chris also, just to, just to give you the logistics of Chris, he is a professor of theology, retired from one of the American universities, and he's the author of several books, all of which are wonderful. The first one is about reincarnation. The second one is called dark night, early dawn, which was fantastic. And his most recent one, and the one that he will be talking about tonight, describes his research method, which he'll tell you more about, called LSD in the mind of the universe. Colin, over to you.

Colin Campbell  3:11  
Thanks, Rachel. Good evening, everyone. Yeah. I mean, I don't almost know where to start, because, well, let me start by saying this. It was about, I think, a year ago, a little more relatively recently, I stumbled upon the title, dark night, early dawn. And I was particularly struck by the subtitle, which is steps towards a new ecology of mind. And that for me, just rang massively, and I simply had to get a hold of this book and read it, just because of that, because, because that's just such a huge passion of mine, in the sense that I think that what we are in search of in These times and amid the very particular conundrums and transformations and all that we're up against in both crisis and other terms, as a human collective, what we're faced with is a kind of a RE, a redo of what we conceive of as our relationship with existence, with life, with the rest of the natural world and so on. So the idea of a new ecology of mine really appealed to me. And I must say, I wasn't disappointed by the book. It really, I think it's a it's a seminal piece, to be very honest. I think, you know, he was saying some really profound things, and things which are very close to my heart as well, in terms of finding ways into, in an experiential way, reinvigorating much of what we've lost over over the i. During the process of kind of secularization, industrialization, globalization and so on, finding a way of of re entering, re accessing that and revivifying it, bring it, bringing it back into our into into being, part of our kind of search for what Being human means now and here forward, you know, and I was, you know, for me, there are lots of ways of, kind of entering into this, but of course, the primary way of exploring into it is to is to kind of delve deeply into what it means to be human. And part of the problem we sit with presently is that we're so drastically distracted in the world that we've created for ourselves presently. And I mean by that the primarily the industrialized world, we're so distracted, you know, by our outer concerns that our inner environment, or what we broadly refer to as our inner environment, and what I would call our pre industrial ancestry, which, of course, is dynamically within us, but has somehow fallen beneath the level of our everyday interactive awareness. You know, where that that, unfortunately, as we question this, this conundrum of how we move forward as a species, how we re negotiate our relationship with the nest, the rest of the natural world, how we confront, or at least engage with some of the more dramatic crises that we face as a humanity now, you know, we need to, we need to find ways of bringing back. What I conceive of is that as that part of us that has been sequestered off, that pre industrial aspect of who we are there, which has kind of been labeled regressive and, you know, primitive and all sorts of names that we use, in a sense, to sublimate it and trivialize it and depreciate it and throw it out of the the kind of, I don't quite know what to call it, but the engagement with where we're at and so, you know, when I came across Chris's work, and I've read some of his subsequent work, and of course, before that, I was a great follower of Stan Grof work, out of which a lot of Chris's work comes, you know, I just think that this is an incredibly important way of delving into an a radical way. I also say I'm very deeply of the belief that our engagement right now with the state that we find ourselves in as a humanity requires a radical, potent engagements. You know, we can't really afford to dabble around on the edges of things. So if we're going to look at finding contemporized forms of our pre industrial ancestry, if we're going to look at experiential exploration, deep delving into who we are, what we are, and our broken relationships with the natural world. There has to be a radicalness to this, because it's urgent. It's desperate, in fact, and and so you know, with Grof work, and with with Chris's writing subsequently, and his experimentation and exploration, his deep and profound, in my opinion, courage in the way he's gone in, I think this is just, you know, it's such a profound part of what we are, certainly what I'm passionate about in this time, in terms of the kind of work that we're doing, as Rachel said earlier In our contemporary animism program, and trying to rally, you know, interest in an experiential exploration of what re animating ourselves might mean, might look like. And I just think that, you know, I think that this is what you're going to see tonight in this talk, is the absolute tip of a profound iceberg. If we could put it that way. You know, as he it's well worth reading his work. It's well worth looking at Grof work as well. It's very much, in my opinion, a critical part of the kind of exploration that I think is most needed at this time. Pardon my bias on this, but I really do believe this, so that, having been said, I'm going to pass back to Rachel, and I'll be very interested to hear some of your reflections at the end. Thank you, fantastic.

Rachel Fleming  9:52  
Thank you, Colin, so we'll dive straight in. I have just asked him, so we've just started, and I have asked him. Um, just to tell us about his research method and how he how he came to the vision that he will then tell you about later on in the interview, and how that fits into kind of the animist world that we're exploring. So it starts in the middle of sentence is his first sentence, so you've only missed about two or three words, but yes, that's where we'll start. So I'm going to hand over to you now, Gabby, and enjoy. I find him very mind blowing. But see what you think, Gabby, go. Thank you. You so

Rachel Fleming  10:50  
we're not getting any sound. GABBY I

Rachel Fleming  11:11  
I know this works because we checked it earlier. So sorry. What's the what's the problem? Rachel, we're not getting any sound on it. Is anybody getting any sound on it. No.

Rachel Fleming  11:39  
Oh, after all, after the introduction, that's going to be disappointing if you can't hear him.

Speaker 2  11:59  
Any insights here, because I'm not exactly sure what's going on.

Rachel Fleming  12:02  
You want to give it another junta press go again.

Chris Bache  12:05  
Share in the animistic community is the belief that nature is infused with consciousness, fused with mind and soul. And of course, now we know how vast the physical universe is, and the question becomes, how large is the mind of the universe? How deep is it? And so I was just out of graduate school in 1978 in my finish in philosophy of religion, and I met the work of Stanislav Grof, who many of you know, one of the foremost thinkers in the Transpersonal psychology community, in the psychedelic community, and I read his book, realms of the human unconscious, and my life pivoted with that book, because I immediately saw that his research was relevant, not only to clinical psychology, but also to philosophy that it would he was offering a method to actually, safely and systematically explore the deepest levels of consciousness we're in lay the answers to the philosophical questions that I was carrying coming out of a training and Religious Studies. So in 1979 I began what became a 20 year journey, working with LSD, and there was a 1979 LSD is what Stan had done his research with, and that's what I chose to continue with. If I were doing it today, I would have a more diversified cocktail of Ayahuasca, civil side and more. But I worked with LSD, and I chose to work with very high doses for reasons that are too complicated to go into now, but that had a profound impact on the work, because it not only changed how deep the wind worked the work went, but it changed how wide it went. The field of consciousness that I took in these transformational exercises expanded with the power of the state of consciousness that I was entering to enter into these exercises. So basically, I did this work in standard grafian protocol, totally isolated from the world with a sitter, a trained clinical psychologist, sitter. I did it at home, in a controlled environment, totally internally focused, not in any with any contact with the outside world, amplifying the states of awareness with carefully selected music designed to empower the states of consciousness in which you basically just Shatter your mind in essentially working at these levels, you just Shatter your mind, and your mind dissolves out into subtler and subtler forms or aspects of reality, and it became a. Systematic exploration of what I think of as the mind of the universe. I hesitate to call the divine, though sometimes I do. It's just because the divine has so many culturally infused qualities in history that I'd rather avoid. So I think of it as the mind of the universe, and I did this work for 20 years, always keeping very careful records and whatnot, and then I digested those experiences for another 20 years, because this is these are not immediately transparent experiences. They're very complex and interwoven, and they involve many levels of reality being orchestrated in the same kind of titles that surges of these states. And there was a systematic instruction. I found that one session more or less started where the other session stopped. When you work in this systematic fashion that was progressive deepening and deepening and deepening. And so it just took years for me to understand what the universe was showing me and where it was taking me, and I was being shown things. I mean, I always had a sense of a systematic encounter with an intelligence that was orchestrating my experience in dialog with me, not taking any form, never taking any any deity form or any archetypal form, but always when pressed, dissolving into deeper and deeper layers of infinity. Anyway. So that is, cumulatively, the story that I'm telling in LSD, in the mind of the universe.

Rachel Fleming  16:39  
Would you say, Chris, that this is an objective reality, that if anybody that did a similar method, I mean, I think, I think what you did was incredibly brave. But would would everybody kind of reach this unfolding that you did using that method, or was that not possible to say?

Chris Bache  16:57  
I think I think it is possible to say, I think Stan Grof work allows us to say it, and where he's dealing with integrating the experiences of 1000s of people. And I'm only talking integrating my experiences, but my experiences fit comfortably within the larger matrix that Grof is work has explored, and it's a complicated answer, because on the one hand I want to say yes, and on the other hand, I have to qualify that immediately, because when you begin this work, these substances only amplify consciousness. They don't give you an experience, they don't take you a particular place. They amplify your mind. And because each of us has a different life story, then the mind which is amplified is different, and we therefore, when an amplified mind engages the deeper mind of the universe, what comes forward will be, in the beginning, somewhat unique, and will reflect our individual history. And that's why these substances are very helpful for healing. They evoke our unconscious, and therefore they evoke our problems. And it's an individual experience. But if you keep going farther, if you press to the limits of your time, space, identity, if you press to the limits of what your individual history can hold and go through this transformation we call ego death, then you begin to open into spiritual reality, farther removed from your own personal history, and that's when the experiences begin to overlap. That's when they begin to converge. Now my understanding is that spiritual reality is not simply something you enter and pluck fruit from, like plucking an apple from a tree. It's interactive. It's always interactive. So there's a participatory quality to our experiences. So the mind that we bring to the encounter access a seed catalyst that crystallizes a certain set of experiences from the infinite potential of the mind of the universe. And then as we internalize those experiences and are purified by those experiences, it changes the seed mind, and then we it catalyzes an even deeper level of secrets from the universe. So it's a both and situation participatory. But once you understand the cycle of participation, then I think the universe that we discover is coherent and consistent. My universe is the same universe that is discovered by contemplative monks, the mystical traditions, the near death episode traditions. There are degrees of depth, and then we have to be careful, because you can reach a point where you think, Oh, this is what the reality is. And it turns out, well, no, this is what reality is at this level of reality, but you can pop that and go into a deeper level of reality, and things change a bit.

Rachel Fleming  20:11  
One thing that I find really exciting about your work is that we talk about practices. You know that finding the right practices, to find the cracks kind of in ourselves to get back to a much more porous, expanded way of being. And yet, these practices take repetition and tenaciousness and everything, and you have used a different method here. You've used what, what one might kind of think of as a fast track to some of these experiences. I mean, it's a very difficult method, and I'm sure not one that you would kind of recommend to a lot of people, but that that feels, for me, where the excitement of your work is as you fast tracked a lot of slower practices and possibly got to the edge of the map that a lot of these contemplative practices have got to I feel as though you've managed to go further than than much that I've seen before on kind of what the underlying nature of reality is. Would you say that's true?

Chris Bache  21:17  
It is a fast track, except it's a fast track that doesn't allow any bypassing. So the fact that it's a fast track means it's a much more intensely concentrated track. So purification, which in the conventional spiritual path, would be drawn out over years, can take place within days, and as any woman who's given birth knows, a short labor is not necessarily an easier labor. It's just much, much more intense. And this is true for this type of practice, too. The purifications that one goes through in order to acclimate to these subtler and cleaner and clearer states of reality, those purifications and detoxifications are extremely intense. I mean, they send you in convulsions across the floor, in throwing up, constantly coming and going, and they require a systematic purification of your lifestyle, just as any traditional spiritual practice does. And I want to emphasize that the states of consciousness that I touched for hours at a time, we usually only learn about these realities from the work of contemplative mystics who have a certain sense that they abide in these realities. And I emphasize that this is a practice, not of abiding. It's a it's a temporary access. It's only temporary immersion in these states. And I don't want to confuse temporary immersion from abiding immersion all honor to the Great Ones who abide in these realities. You know this is different. This is temporary access, very, very intense purification. But you don't come away with permanent access embedded in your nature to these realities. What you come away with are seeds of Transcendence, or seed experiences, which you then have to nurture within your your daily spiritual practice. You have to nurture them within your embodied, physical existence. And I also want to mention that these practices in the earlier times in history have tended to be associated with the dissociative spirituality. So the goal was to get up into Transcendence and get away from Earth, you know. So these are the up and out cosmologies of the last five Axial Age, religions in the last 5000 years, the cosmology that emerged in my work is very different. It wasn't about getting Transcendence. It was Transcendence and service of incarnation, Transcendence and service of deeper integration. It was about opening up and letting in as much of the universe as possible, and then going through the transformations that would allow this energy to live in the historical body, and giving me, at one point, insights into where the evolutionary intelligence was taking the human family as a whole. I began this work thinking in terms of a personal model of transformation, but things happen that just shattered that model, and I began to understand that I was had been drawn into a collective transformation, and that my my so called individual work, was part of a collective process, which then naturally yielded some insights into our collective family, human family, evolutionary trajectory,

Rachel Fleming  24:57  
fantastic, and I want to ask you that. That in great depth in a minute. Because for me, that's kind of the exciting thing that you discovered, if you like. But first of all, I'd love to ask you about the aliveness and intelligence in the universe. Then we are talking about the aliveness and intelligence in everything around us, you know, and humans being just one load of that that just kind of as is everything an animate world and animate universe. I just wondered if you could summarize your understandings of the aliveness in the universe and how layered that is, and how deep that goes, how big it is, yes, what did you

Speaker 1  25:47  
What did you mean?

Chris Bache  25:49  
Oh, you're asking a lot, because, you know, the universe is so vast, and the mind of the universe has so many layers to it, and those layers are, of course, all complexly interwoven, and it's all alive, and it's all intelligent, and it's it's everywhere we dig into the universe, of course, we discover aliveness and intelligence. We're finding that we can't dig in anywhere and not encounter this intelligence, this living intelligence. So when you dig into the mind of the universe, you find layers of intelligence operating there. There are layers of intelligence operating in the biosphere, operating in the incarnational rhythms of a planet I began to experience at one point, for example, reincarnation, the I had gone into, sorry to cut so many corners here, but there's no way to do it except jump into it, go into states of consciousness in which time was radically dilated, not eternity, not timelessness, but radical dilations of time and dilations of personal boundaries, so dissolving into my human family, becoming the human family, and from that perspective, experiencing reincarnation, the pulse of reincarnation, taking place, All of us together as a single organism, incarnating generation by generation. And I experienced whole lifetimes, incarnating in generations, living their lives, dying and returning into the spiritual reality. And there was an intelligence to this entire process, so that all of our what I had previously thought of as individual karma, individual challenging, individual transformation. All of our individual karma was part of a vast network of exquisitely tuned collective karma, and our and history was expressing the rhythms of collective transformation through the medium of our individual transformation, just one example, and then going deeper, beginning to experience the pulse of the entire universe as a single living organism. And when you when you dissolve it into that level of oneness. You know, the Buddhist have a word for it. They talk about Nirvana, blown out. Self is blown out, or Shunyata, emptiness of self. When you experience the world as one in any scale, then you experience that there are no permanent boundaries between yourself and the world. So literally, there is no private self. And so the self kind of pops and life runs through you. You run through life, and the whole of life breathes as one. It breathes together. As Plotinus said, So, everywhere you touch it, the world is intelligent. At the very end of my journey, in the 70th session, out of 73 I did 73 sessions. In the 70th session, I was taken deep, deep, deep into what I call deep time, farther into time than I'd ever been, taken before and given a series of visions. And one of those visions had to do with experiencing, in some way, from my perspective and my history, the large story of what was happening in the universe, and I experienced reincarnation. I was experiencing the same deep pattern, and I experienced stars of light shooting out of time and space shooting into the universe. And I understood that these were what I call. Diamond souls. These were the fruition of a reincarnation process creating a diamond pure soul that could explore the spiritual world in dimensions previously unavailable to it that time and space was creating diamond souls over vast periods of time, so layers and layers and layers of intelligence operating at different levels.

Rachel Fleming  30:29  
So when I read your book, Chris, I mean, it's literally mind blowing. I mean it, it's kind of it feels as though it's science fiction, or it's in the realms of science fiction, and yet, for me, there was nothing in there that didn't sound right. You know, it just kind of has that feeling, ah, yes, I understand this, and it feels right to me. And I'd love to talk to you about the evolutionary process. You touched on it a bit there, but let's go into that in more detail, but first of all reincarnation, because that is something that obviously we don't all feel is true, but you did earlier work on the subject of reincarnation, and just before we go on to the evolutionary story that you've seen, could you talk about a little bit about reincarnation and your work on this and why you believe that that is what's happening.

Chris Bache  31:25  
Well, I did. I wrote my first book on reincarnation because I thought it was such an essential principle, because our philosophical roads divide. If you think we only are on earth one time, but we're on Earth multiple times, those need to different visions of reality, and today, I think we have overwhelming empirical evidence that reincarnation is simply true. It's a fact of life. I think Ian Stevenson at the University of Virginia and his study of young children around the world who have spontaneous memories of their most immediate life, he's just documented hundreds and hundreds of these children. And his research has been challenged, but it's still it's holding up. And I think he is the Charles Darwin of reincarnation studies. And then we have past life therapies, people coming in, highly qualified people healing, using past life access to past life memories, to heal present life traumas. This, to me, is just an empirical fact of life. So after living, it takes a long time to sort of live in a reincarnation universe, to understand the implications of the fact that there's this pulse of life and that all of us have been here multiple times, and all of us have deeper histories with place, with people, with projects, and that we're always starting something and we're continuing something in one lifetime, and we're doing something that's going to be continued in another lifetime, that this overlapping complexity so that I don't see little children as little anymore. I don't see old people as old anymore. Sometimes little children are deeply old in Seoul, and old people are sometimes very young in Seoul, and you just tune to a different level. Now, I had that in the early stages of my psychedelic work. And in the early stages of my psychedelic work, I was taken into some of the nuts and bolts of reincarnation and karma, and then that became kind of ground one as I began to be taken into the human family and to experience the human family evolving and growing through reincarnation. This, to me, reincarnation is simply the higher octave of evolution. It's the cutting edge of evolution in our particular species, where evolution tends was trying to change whole species. Reincarnation is evolving individuals within certain species. And I don't think just human species. I think somewhere lower down the line, reincarnation begins to turn in just state. And then the question becomes, well, where is reincarnation taking us, if we are reincarnating so many times, where are we going? What's what's the whole project of it? What's the purpose of it? And to determine to answer the question, what's the purpose of a reincarnating species is complicated, because once you understand that every human being on the planet is reincarnating with a purpose, its specific purpose, then you realize the full breadth of the living experience of human being, the breath of what's being learned. That what humanity is learning is just enormous. And when we try to say, well, this is the purpose of life, we have a tendency to sort of take a purpose that we can identify with and maybe over generalize it to encompass all purposes. So we really have to look at the whole of the human family and gestate the whole of the things that people are learning to even begin to come up with some generality that encompasses them all you see what I mean? So, so in some cases, we can be learning love, we can be learning generosity, we can be learning strength of self. We can be learning physical defense. We can be learning surrendering physical defense, what one person is growing into in one lifetime. Another person may be growing out of and both of them are living their truth

Colin Campbell  35:58  
at a process level.

Chris Bache  36:01  
Most of the Eastern religions basically say, Yes, you grow, you activate the chakras. You bring higher and higher levels of consciousness online. But when your consciousness opens up to divine essence, when it opens up to the you that is more real than any of your individual, private incarnational use the divine. You the essential. You. When you open up to that, then you reach enlightenment that the Hindus call moksha. Means you can escape, you can leave. So once you wake up, then let's get out of here. There's better places to be than Earth. So that's an up, and not cosmology. But what happened in my sessions was different than that. I reached a point about halfway on my journey when all of my former lives began to come into me. I was in a again, a kind of a pregnant time, reality of deep time, and my former lives were coming in and were coming in, and it was like wrapping a filament of kite string around a spool. But that's string was human experience. It was whole human lifetimes. And they kept coming together, and they reached a critical mass. And when they reached a critical mass, they fused into one. When that happened, there was a tremendous explosion of energy, and a diamond Luminosity exploded from my chest. And that's when I began to understand, and was shown, that we make progress incrementally, lifetime by lifetime, as we incarnate. But the goal is not simply to make incremental progress. The goal eventually is that all of our lives come infused into one and we become, on earth, a being who has 100,000 hundreds of 1000s of years of history in it, awakened within it, and empowered within it. That is the being that we are becoming, and that is a different kind of being than an egoic being. It's the vast depth of its heart is deep is bigger. The breath of its mind is bigger, the texture of its social relationships is bigger, and its relationship to nature is different because it knows that the world we leave is the world we inherit. It has a deeper, embodied texture of its relationship with nature. And my discovery was that this is not simply a path of individuals. This is simply a story of individual spiritual awakening that we are all going through this transition. We are all giving birth to the diamond soul. The entire species is at a point in its history where it can no longer afford the luxury we're trying to live on this planet in the fragmented egoic state. When the world order is created by egos, it leads to a fragmented order that serves some and not others. But when the soul wakes up to the with the profound compassion of its history, the soul lives on this planet differently than the ego does. And I think we are coming into a very profound, tumultuous period of history, which I think of as a birth process. It will feel like a death process, and it is a death process. It's it's basically destroying the culture that was built by the ego, and destroying the ego which built that culture, and in that process of dying to that which is small, giving birth to something new, giving birth literally, to a new stage in the human story, not on. A new body politic and New Economics, and a shift I think, is taking place at the depths of the collective unconscious. The plate tectonics of the collective psyche are shifting in that Jungian sense, deep, deep down inside the human psyche. This transformation is taking place so that all human beings who are born after this transition will be living their individual life within the matrix of a different collective psyche. That, I think, is the work of the hour. That's what we are working to, and part of this to actualize, and part of this is reawakening to Divine Presence, which we've stripped out of nature tried to unsuccessfully, but reawakening to this common ground that we have with nature, to This intelligence that surrounds us and saturates us.

Rachel Fleming  41:01  
Wow, Chris. I mean, I'm imagining people hearing this for the first time. It's kind of difficult to get your head around it. And I want to bring what I want to bring Colin in in a minute. So to summarize, in my kind of terms, and what you're talking about, really, is, is the evolution of the human species individuals and collectively, towards a position where we can remember our entire history. So if we take reincarnation as a given, then we're evolving towards a place where we can remember past our past incarnations on this earth. And, you know, Colin, can I bring you in here? Because there's something that you talk about, you know, in reanimating ourselves, we need to have a completely new cognitive framework. You know, that that the the way of connecting to the intelligence in the universe is so foreign to us now that we need a whole different framework to kind of be able to wrestle with with that kind of information. What's your feeling about what Chris is talking about? I know you've read the book too, and I know you love it. So biased question here, but yeah, from your perspective,

Colin Campbell  42:23  
Thanks, Rachel. Well, first of all, I really wanted to say how much of an honor it is to meet you, Chris. I have to say the encounter with your books, and the first one I encountered was dark night, early dawn. Was was really, well, tectonic in nature for me, and I'm filled with questions, and was, and have been all the way through reading your books and re reading them and reading them again, and thinking about and brewing on it. And a lot of the questions I really want to ask, I have no idea how would even articulate. I can feel them and I can sense them, but how, and I, you know, so, I mean, I can see, feel myself at the sort of edges, you know, of my, what I call my present cognition. Because, you know, I was, I was lucky enough to be born into and brought up within a traditional indigenous culture here in southern Africa. And through, through my childhood, lived in wilderness and among people who had a very, very particular relationship with wilderness and a cosmology that came out of that. And subsequently, I find myself, you know, in

Speaker 3  43:45  
in the

Colin Campbell  43:46  
worlds of post industrial world, trying to reconcile that part of me with the part of me I find myself in now and finding that it's very difficult to bring it feels like in a certain sense, that there are two cognitive frameworks within me at some level, and that somehow I'm tasked with trying to reconcile these two parts of myself and reading reading through your books. I you know, where I found myself, find myself back into the cognitive system, really, that I grew up in, and that forms a kind of an under structure within my experience now and but I mean within that, then I have, I have questions. I mean loads of them, which, which your books really, really brought up in me, and among them, among the most difficult to articulate are questions around time and and the notion that somehow or other, you know, so reincarnation is not something that really comes into the cosmology is here in southern Africa, and yet it does. Implicit in certain terms.

Speaker 3  45:05  
But I'm really

Colin Campbell  45:08  
so as we look at this idea of reincarnation, the cognitive framework that I would perceive it from here, as we speak about it, relies on a sequence of time that speaks of a past from which we come and a future to which we go. But what happens if we take that out, if, in fact, if, in fact, that's nearly my present cognitive framework. But you know, how would we understand reincarnation and the notion of a trajectory towards something, if time in its kind of sequence from beginning to seeming culmination, or some such thing. If that wasn't the case, yeah, I don't know if I'm making any sense.

Chris Bache  45:58  
It's a good question. If you if we eliminate the arrow of time, then reincarnation begins to look like multi incarnation, not reincarnation. Some people have conceptualized as we're living all of our lives simultaneously in a and we're interacting. All these lives are active and interacting in a way that befuddles the logic of linear development, and it requires a different kind of logic. And I've tried to think in that world multiple times, and I basically keep coming down to I can't do it. I mean, I literally cannot live in a world where Multi incarnation makes sense. I can't make it make sense. Now, another little thread Robert Monroe, from the Monroe Institute of Applied Science, out of body guy you know, has been wrote three wonderful books in the out of body state, exploring the universe daily from the out of body state. He says, You reach a point in your spiritual development, where you discover that you can incarnate in any time period you wish. So soul forward does not mean time forward, right? So you can incarnate in the 10th century BC, and next you can incarnate in the 20th century. AD, so permeability of time that you see how that continues the concept of linear development, but it flexes on the concept of times, absolute linearity. For myself, I've gone through so many permutations of time, moving into deep time where you can I experienced my entire life in the early stages, birth to death, simultaneously present. Absolutely. I was experiencing the whole of my life, the end and the beginning and all of its development as a simultaneous later. I was taken into periods of time where 100,000 years were being lived out as if it were one minute. It's convinced me that the universe has many modalities of time built into it, that when we move into deeper dimensions of reality, there are different modalities of time that are available. There all that which you would think. And it does make me receptive to the idea of letting go of a concept of linear time and linear development. And somehow I try to reconcile the fact that from the universe's perspective, there are multiple modalities of time, so that the universe can show me the future from its time which is and can give me the experience of knowing the future as something which has already happened and simultaneously which is yet to happen, and at the same time, at the same time, hold on to some notion of the value and the challenge of something approximating linear development. And I think my best take is that life chops it's its challenges to it chops the learning into bits and pieces, and we can't learn it all in one lifetime. We can't do it all simultaneously. It's easier if it's just broken down into bits and pieces. And if this, if this challenge of linear development, is coming to a fruition, and is coming to a diamond soul, a an awareness that holds all of its time moments in its present consciousness on Earth. This, of course, is not the end of the developmental story, of the linear story, because in a million years, will be far. Other in a billion years, will be farther still the universe just getting warmed up, you know, is that we have no reason for thinking that the universe is is in anywhere near the end of its evolutionary story. We know it's really at the early stages of its story. So I think of time is one of the great gifts of evolution. Individuality is one of the great gifts of the physical universe. Time is one of the gifts of the physical universe. Behind that lay lies permutations of metaphysics that put that are more fluid with respect to time. But inside space time, I think there is an approximate linear arrow of time which serves the soul's purpose, which serves some deeper cosmic web. And yet, at the same time, when we are in the linear development if we open up to the universe, if we open up to the universe's sense of time, we often get these flashes of more than more than the present. You know more parallel dimensions of time. So your question makes a lot of sense, and it's, it's a substantive question.

Rachel Fleming  51:29  
Can I ask one Colin, or do you want to come back on that? Okay, so yeah, great. This is the problem with your work, Chris, we need to keep trying to we're out in kind of like inarticulable terrain, aren't we, when we get to that you what you call the diamond soul, then when there's this moment of remembering what, what are The other attributes, what are the other kind of what does that bring? Other than remembering and wholeness? You know, did you have an experience of what else?

Chris Bache  52:10  
Well, first of all, I think full consciousness is what we return to when we die. So while we're in the Bardo Earth, Bardo, earth, kind of stage. When we die, we return to whole consciousness. So it's not something we're unfamiliar with. It's something we are familiar with. And then we precipitate out of whole consciousness into part consciousness, egoic consciousness, and we return. So it's a it's a constant accordion kind of effect. We die as we get large, we're born, we get small, we die. We get large. We're born, we get small sooner or later, if we just keep them for a few 1000 years, 100 million years, sooner or later, large wakes up inside physical consciousness, and so it's simply a consolidation of what's taking place naturally and normally. It's just a stage in this process, the times that I've been carried into deep time and experience temporarily my diamond soul, and then the diamond stole the soul that's emerging as an archetypal imprint, an archetypal form. You

Chris Bache  53:40  
Yeah, it's hard to describe because of the enormity and the beauty and the joy we're looking we're talking about a human being that's completely healed of all the wounds of history. That's healed of all the terrible things we've done to each other, men and women and wars and violence, healed all those scars, healed a tremendous breath of communion with the natural world, an intimacy with all life forms, not Only then, a breath of companionship with all life and with other human beings and with human community and with natural nature's community, but an openness of the mind able to take in more directly, enter into deeper communion with the intelligence of the universe. I mean, the genius of the universe has all the answers to all the technological limit questions we want to have answers to, and we just are not able to download all that knowledge. And the diamond soul is a more complete and higher. Potency of human being that can enter into deeper downloads from the divine intelligence. But it's not only an expansion of heart and an expansion of mind, our physical senses are also amplified by orders of magnitude in the very, very last session. After 73 sessions, the very last session, the universe gave me an experience of what I call diamond vision. Suddenly, in a kind of a late, late session, wind down, clear space, my vision became 1000s of times more cute and sharper than it had ever been before. I could see things, details, gradients of color, sharpness and precision of form. I could just see. I was amazed that I ever had accepted this fuzzy stuff as real seeing. This was diamond clarity seeing. And then after 10 minutes, it went away, and I was seeing the way I normally see. And that's when I discovered, I realized what I was being shown is that we tend to think of sensation as kind of a biomechanical process, but it's actually a conscious process, and the more consciousness which is is present in this body, this body has built into it the capacity for infinitely higher levels of sensitive experience, Touch, hearing, seeing, sensitivities of all manner of physical sensations. So it truly is. It's heaven on earth in the body, so that the body participates in the qualities of heaven without having to leave the physical existence. That's why, I mean, it's not an up and out cosmology. It's bringing it in deeper and deeper and deeper, changing, literally, the physiology of the body, to allow it to operate in this ecstatic state, which becomes the normal state. Yeah, that's a child, I think, is it's worth the labor that we're going into to give birth to and we are going in a terribly, terribly severe labor. Our past is being stripped away. Will be stripped away. We will lose all capacities that we associate with normal and minimal existence. This is what happens in all mystical traditions, in all psychedelic traditions, literally, the small has to be broken ground, to dust, stripped and dismembered in order for the new to awaken within us. And this is happening now, historically, where we're entering into what I think of as the dark night of our collective soul. The Dark Night is an image often used for a hard time, but it's not a hard time in John of the Cross, the dark night of self is a hard time. The Dark Night of the Soul is a very, very intense purification time which immediately precedes the awakening of full illumination. And the dark night of the of the collective soul is a time of intense purification, intense loss of reality as we have known it up to this point in time, and I think out of the out of the pain and suffering that's coming, it's going to crack US Open and break us down to our center. And in this ordeal, we will not survive, but we will give birth to that in us which is more beautiful, more ecstatic, more competent, more plugged in. I think we truly are becoming a species of Bud, species of Christ and prophets. These are the models we've had trying to give us some for vision of what's happening in the early years. We could not imagine an ordinary human being reaching that level of excellence. But now we're beginning to understand through reincarnation, over and over and over and over again, slowly, we grow into that level of excellence, which is simply a level of transparency to the essential condition which in which we experience life in. The irony is, we experience what's always been happening all the way along. It's always been this way. The universe has always been one. The universe has always been filled with intelligence. We have always been empty of self. But somehow we distracted ourselves from thinking that that's not there. It's always been there. So we're waking up to the paradise that the universe already is. We just been missing it,

Rachel Fleming  1:00:29  
Chris, I just find your experience and your vision just such a hopeful one as we move into what we see as ecological crisis and societal crisis, and I just again, as I felt quite emotional, said at the beginning it was just one of the most inspiring books, or the most inspiring book last year, but what one of the most of my lifetime? You know I and I'm sure Colin would agree with me on that. So it's so wonderful to hear you speak. We have 10 minutes. I wondered if anybody had any questions, I appreciate it's quite a lot to take on this. Please do raise your hand if you have anything to ask Chris. Also to say, we've invited Chris back, Chris back later in the year to be with us a bit more, so there'll be more opportunity to talk with him. Does anybody have a question? Otherwise, I'm going to pick on Colin again, because I know you've got to list Colin,

Speaker 1  1:01:35  
Rachel, maybe I can speak to the question I put in the chat. That was really for Stefan, but it was kind of a tiny, tiny gesture towards some sense of rightness and these much, much bigger movements that we can't even begin to fathom. And then Chris used to spoke on that, on paradigms that I've never heard before, and part of me feels so extremely joyful, and like Rachel, I'm kind of want to weep at the same time. And as we are entering this dark night of the soul, which I think most of us kind of know, we can feel it, and it's as I don't know, you know, I feel like small and I'm a mother of three kids, and I, you know, and I'm trying to understand how to be a mother in this moment in time and to love my children well. And I'm not very sure how to do that. So it's a very human thing, but it's the sort of smallest fractals of all the other things, if I can make any sense in that, and I just wondered if you could speak to that a little bit. No.

Chris Bache  1:02:52  
Couple thoughts. One of them is, first, I absolutely identify with what you're saying. I have three children and Karen, parenting is of the age, and the age we're going into is going to be different than parenting of the age we're coming out of. Because, you know, we're trying to inculcate a different set of values in our children as we internalize these values ourselves. And I think that's how nature works. Each one of us is a cell within a fractal cell within a tissue of consciousness and the tissue of the body. And we are as we actualize the future in our individual lives, we catalyze an actualization of the future in our collective lives. And we do it not simply by example. We do it because every person who internalizes and becomes the future that we know we need to become, they become a seed catalyst which psychically activates the web of transformation in people they will never know, they will never meet, necessarily, but it's there. Just as we have been nourished by the ancestors, we have been nourished by other people who are making transformation. Our transformation nourishes other people. This came up in my sessions multiple times that the states of consciousness I was entering into were being fed into the collective psyche. We're filtering into the collective psyche. So when we do ritual at dawn, when we do rituals of embracing the sun as as a representative of this larger collective intelligence, when we do rituals of conservation and cultivate a lifestyle of using less and doing more. When we actualize those things, we make it that much easier for the entire species to hold to actualize those things, until eventually we come to a tipping point right and. At the tipping point, the Uncommon Sense starts to become common sense in this you know, this transformation is not something that's going to happen to us, though. I think there is a way in which nature knows what it is doing. We are not generating this transformation. Nature is doing it. Nature is taking us through it, but we are cooperating with this process, and it's not going to be handed to us. We have to create it. We have to create it out of the fabric of our being, where we are living. And here's a very another consoling thought. When you look at the reincarnation literature, you look at the near death episode literature, one thing becomes very clear, we choose the incarnations that we find ourselves in. So at a time when we knew more, we knew what we were getting into. We knew what this century was going to be about. We knew that the dark night of the soul was coming upon us, we made a choice to incarnate where we did and to become the people that we are. We and so therefore each one of us carries a component of the transformation that humanity is trying to make. Each one of us is the question is not, what? What can we do? The question is, do we have the courage to do what is within our reach to do? Because what is within our reach has already been decided by the soul. Okay, so parenting is a big part of this transition. Everything that we're doing, art, medicine, knowledge, communication technology is a big part of this transition. We're working it as we go.

Rachel Fleming  1:06:54  
Thank you, Chris, thank you. Thank

Rachel Fleming  1:07:07  
right. Thank you so much for sticking with us. I can see some hands up here just to say we have rocketed over time. We were going to edit it to be less than an hour, but when we came to do the editing, we found that we couldn't, and I really wanted to include that question at the end, because it's very much brings it down to what can we do? So apologies for that. We'd love you to stay a little bit longer to to kind of share your thoughts. I saw two hands up there. One was Carol, another one was Isabella. Carol, would you like to go first if you unmute yourself?

Rachel Fleming  1:08:01  
Gabby, Can you unmute Are we all so the technology

Speaker 2  1:08:08  
you can everyone can unmute themselves. Fantastic. Carol, lovely to see you. Thank you.

Speaker 3  1:08:17  
Yeah, I'm sort of rendered speechless, but, but I wanted to ask what I thought I heard Chris say was at the end there was that our task is to tune in to who we really are in this lifetime and live that, and that's the best we can do. Because my first question was, what? What ritual can I do? What task you know would would accelerate this process? But it sounds like, from what he says, that that's not what it's about. It's about living what we've dreamt in for this lifetime. Would you agree with that or comment on that?

Rachel Fleming  1:09:07  
That's certainly what I heard. And actually, if you read the book, I think that's pretty much what he's saying as well. Colin, would you like to comment on that?

Colin Campbell  1:09:19  
Yeah, I think that is very much what he's saying. I mean, you know, a lot of what he says in the duration of this talk, it's a it's a tiny fragment of much, much bigger body of work dating back into Stan grofs work and so on. So to really get a sense of what each of the little statements he makes, the importance of what he's saying. It's kind of, it's helpful to have, have, have, have that within the context of the much bigger picture. But I think, you know, as I was, as I was, we were coming to the end of. This, I suddenly thought back, and I thought I made a mistake when I during the introduction, I said, I spoke of the subtitle of his book as being the new ecology of mind, steps towards the new ecology of mind, when, in fact, it steps towards the deep ecology of mind. But, but I think that you know that that's that, having listened to the talk, you can probably realize why I made that mistake. Because we're, we're in a moment now which is unprecedented. I mean, any moment of experience is unprecedented. We are. We are as individuals, as a collective, as a globe, as a universe. This is an unprecedented moment, and yet, at the same time, we come out of a long, long, long, long history that this, this new component of who we are is So on one level where we're pulling back into work we were potentially and what we once did much more effectively, I think, is we, we go back into our our historic roots, our experiential historic roots, our psycho spiritual historic roots, and we draw into informing this present moment. Those what we've gathered in that time, but then in that moment, also we we potentially translate it into a response to the newness of where we are now. And I really think that's the task of our time. And the part that we're not doing very well at the moment is this reaching back into the vast form of who we, who we are is, is, kind of is expressed also in our long, long, long, long, long history, our trajectory of where we've come from to get here. So so I think that you know, the totality of who we are is is, as Chris points out, it's kind of always there. It's always naturally going on. But we we compress ourselves into a fragment of that, and a lifetime is in a certain sense that, but equally and as importantly, I think, this particular time that we're in now, you know what I tend to refer to as an industrial, cultural, globalized time is even more so, you know, because I think we've we've condensed ourselves and retracted ourselves, retracted the notion of who we are into an even tinier fragment than we might have done previously. And so I do think what we're tasked with right now very, very fundamentally, is remembering, on the one hand, which is going back and finding ways of RE, entering into what is inherently in us, which is our past, which is dynamically still present in us and active in us, and at the same time, springing out of that into a dreaming of who we are now and what is asked of us in this in this moment. What is, what does it mean now to be in this newness and this, as Chris so beautifully puts it, this tectonic, profoundly, all encompassing seeming change of what it means to be human, and presumably what it means to be a universe at some level. So I think what you're asking is an incredibly important question, and I think it's a huge one, and probably one which needs a considerable amount of pondering, but I'll say that for the time period.

Speaker 3  1:13:52  
Yeah, my experience in this lifetime is many, many different ways of being, and

Speaker 3  1:14:07  
I'm aware of the sort of small self that just gets on with the everyday life and doesn't and isn't really doing much, but then there's part of me that is doing Much more interesting stuff, or much more spiritual stuff. My question with that is, can I relax and let that happen? Will it happen or should I be focusing? Should I be there's always this worry, isn't there that the world's gonna win? We haven't done enough, and all that kind of anxiety that comes from the industrial setup here. But no answer. Probably

Speaker 4  1:14:54  
one to brew on, yeah. Women's always brewing. Yeah. Before,

Speaker 1  1:15:04  
Isabella, you had a question, you're gonna have to unmute I'm afraid.

Speaker 5  1:15:13  
Yes, brilliant. Thank you. Um, it's my name is actually Christina, but I'm on my laptop. Sorry. So that's why the Zoom is named Isabella. It's maybe more of an observation, or I don't know exactly, but I have to admit that I haven't read that book yet, but I had many of my own experiences of LSD and Ayahuasca when I was young, and it has certainly informed my life. And I would, you know, completely agree with so, so, so many things that he said up to now, and I have been thinking about this a long time, but never very scientifically, but just try to live by what I had experienced and learned. But one thing always puzzled me, because, like he said at the very beginning, it is the taking of the of the drugs is a shortcut to an opening into a world, in a way. I always felt that, and I always felt that it has kind of helped me to have a bigger understanding of the universe and of many, many things that he has been talking about, and in particular, to all these connections, and to the connections, also to my ancestry and to the wisdom of my ancestors and and I always felt an obligation, in some Ways, for some strange reason, to try and share this with others. And in my case, I did try to do that mostly through art. But then my observation was that we are all on so many in different stages in our lives and in our I suppose I don't know in that so called Journey, or, you know, whatever, that it's very, very difficult to often try and explain all these things that we can actually see and all these connections to people who may not have had the privilege of being opening the mind. And so I've often wondered, if we say we about the collective well, does that actually really exist? You know, is that, does that time that we are apparently entering exist as a collective, or is it just some who are at the certain stage in their rebirth or reincarnation, or whatever it is. And you know, does that actually, is there even a sort of a time of that, or is that some, somehow an illusion we have created for ourselves to try and understand things? I don't know. I'm not sure if I make myself clear. It's really difficult to talk about these things.

Rachel Fleming  1:18:50  
I'm thinking of what he was saying about if, if the individual does it, then it kind of adds to the collective, and I'm just thinking of Rupert, sheldrakes, Morphic resonance, Colin will be able to kind of talk more about that. But I just wonder if it's that kind of process at work that once the individuals start, then it just becomes easier for the collective. Is that what you're saying? Christina, I may have understood,

Speaker 5  1:19:23  
yes. I mean, I'm not sure what I'm saying. It's more that I'm asking. I've often, you know, there is, there is maybe this, this worry or this doubt, because I have become very, very aware, and hopefully tried, at least very hard to live my life in a way that being very aware of every thing you say, and everything every gesture one does, and, you know, every pebble you drop into the pond has a has a, you know, yeah, it does make some sort of a little wave, perhaps, and it touches things, and it changes things. It changes the universe, if you wish. So there is that awareness, but I'm not sure that that awareness is really the same for everybody. And yes, it does make a big difference, but at the same time, we are worrying about an age we are entering, and I do, don't get me wrong, and I like, you know, to think about this, but at the same time, I'm sort of thinking, hang on a minute, in a way that doesn't really make sense in the big scheme of the universe, because it has all it's already there. It has already been it's already, you know, whatever comes, it's not a particularly new entrance into something, because some people are at this stage, and others have this or some, you know, we have already had it's, It's not the same exactly, but it's, it's not necessarily very specific, just to our very lifetime here and now, because the same pains, the same choice, the same thing, has been experienced a million, million times four in A way, and it is, in the end, about the individual, which also has been historically named so many times, like interestingly, what Carl says it is, it is like the Greek poets have been very clear about saying and become who you are, in a way, and that's that's development, isn't it, that to have that understanding of the universe and of the vastness and of the lack of of boundaries, in a way, and that everything is interconnected, absolutely everything. So I don't know anyway.

Rachel Fleming  1:22:02  
Thank you so much, Chris, and I'm sure that we could, like really explore that we have about six minutes left. Theresa has got a question before I come to you, Teresa, I just wanted to say as well, just in case people have to go. So Chris is going to come back as part of our contemporary animism program, which starts again July. We have a new intake every year, so we still have some places on that. Somebody was saying that they'd love to, Jackie, you were saying that you'd love to explore this kind of subject more. That's what we're hoping to do in this year's program, breathing workshops, absolutely again. Jackie, you're saying that it'd be wonderful to have a breathing workshop. I'm hoping that we're going to do that as part of this program as well. But yes, absolutely. Breathwork certainly for me, it's where it's at. Yeah. So Therese, I wanted to come to you, and if anybody has one, put up your digital hand, and we'll try and get them in.

Speaker 1  1:23:02  
But there's lovely to see.

Speaker 6  1:23:06  
It's just a comment. I don't know. I haven't read his books. I haven't actually heard of him before, but it's just an observation of something that he he said that even though he kind of rejects the transcendent thought of or the thought of transcending earthly, bodily reality like you find in much Eastern thought, he still presents an idea that, by That fits very neatly with our Western thought of evolution and development, and I'm not sure quite what I think about that. It's like he takes something old evolutionary thoughts and rejects it, and he presents replaces it with another one. And I don't know, I guess I'd like to see more of using his experience as a way to accept that time isn't linear, and things exist at the same time in different layers, here and now, and not necessarily for a means, but just that, this is how it is. I'm not sure if I'm making much sense, but

Rachel Fleming  1:24:35  
yeah. Do you have a response on that? Colin?

Colin Campbell  1:24:40  
Well, I think you opening a, it's a kind of door handle thing where we could, we could spend the rest of the night on this topic.

Rachel Fleming  1:24:47  
Yeah,

Speaker 6  1:24:50  
sorry, it's

Colin Campbell  1:24:52  
very important, and I think you're raising some very interesting question, and kind of harkens back into my my question, or. On time and how we perceive things, you know, and when we we have this notion, I think that as Western, well as humanity, that we have a certain way of perceiving time and that that's what being that's part of being human. I don't agree with that. I think that the way we perceive time, and the way we perceive the nature of sequential events is very characteristic of a particular moment in our history as human beings, and is definitely not necessarily the case in our earlier states, and perhaps won't be in our future states either. So so in a way. But what we what we are, what we have to struggle with is the fact that we are indeed immersed within this framework that we call present existence, you know, in the particular cultural, socio cultural, kind of framework that we're in. And, you know, and so when we have these conversations, you know, we're, we're tasked with modulating to other views and other perspectives that we might have within us and within our history and so on. You know, circular dynamics, as opposed to linear dynamics and so on. But at the same time, I think we, we're, we're also tasked with coming back to risk with rest within where we are in order to not get completely lost in the transitive process that we're trying to do. So, you know, I think that, I mean, I don't really, I wouldn't know how to answer the question exactly, but, you know, I think that we

Colin Campbell  1:26:45  
I'm opening a can that could last forever. Now, let me stop there, but I think it's a really good question, and I think it's an interesting thing to ponder further. Yeah, thank you.

Rachel Fleming  1:26:56  
Which we're gonna have to do because it's time or it's time a long time ago. Actually, I do apologize for keeping you longer than you were expecting. Lovely to see you. Look we have a small little group that made it to the end.

Speaker 3  1:27:12  
Yes.

Rachel Fleming  1:27:15  
Dunno what more to say, really. That was Chris Bache. Check out his books. Have a look at our contemporary animism program. If you want to do more of that kind of conversation, we also do a lot of embodied stuff as well. It's not just all talking. So lovely to see you tonight, everybody, and

Rachel Fleming  1:27:36  
see you very soon. Bye for now. Thank you Gabby, thank you Colin,

Speaker 5  1:27:42  
thank you very much.

Speaker 2  1:27:46  
Thank you. Bye. You. Thank You.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
