Speaker 1  0:00  
Our program tonight was brought to us by Heather tishbein. She is a personal friend of Chris's, and so I'm going to ask her to introduce him, Heather.

Heather Tischbein  0:13  
Thank you, Daddy. I'm just over flowing with joy to be able to share my, not really friendship, but my acquaintanceship with Chris, with my ions family. I met Chris 20 years ago through the Holotropic Breathwork network, and Stan Grof and I read his book back then, dark night, early dawn, Steps to a deep ecology of the mind, and got to participate with him in person in a workshop. So that was 20 years ago, and when his new book, LSD and the universe of the mind was advertised on the shift network with the seven weeks seminar, I immediately signed up for that and read the book and participated in that seven week program. In the intervening 20 years, I had a health crisis and spent a couple days in in a coma off planet, which I actually remember that experience and what Chris describes as kind of the over the thematic energy of the mind of the universe is exactly where I was and what I experienced when I was off planet and on life Support. Chris's work has had an impact on my life around understanding who I am as a human being on planet Earth, as as both a part and the whole simultaneously. And I can't even put into the words the help it's been in helping me coming through, really resolving and appreciating. I know this might sound weird, but the gift of early childhood sexual trauma and but more importantly than all of this deepening of understanding has been my felt experience of genuine comfort around when in His presence and and in the in the world view that he puts forth in this latest book, I just feel so much love and comfort for Chris Bache in the world. So it's with immense gratitude that I welcome Chris to my ions family here in southwest Washington and beyond.

Chris Bache  3:10  
Well, thank you very much, Heather, and thank you everybody for inviting me here and letting me be spend this time with you. So let's get into it. We'll see where we go. We have this topic we're looking at today, the birth of the future human is a huge topic, so we're going to have to trim it a little bit and shape it, but we're going to dig into it. I'd like to jump into it and see how far we can actually go into the center this issue. So first I'm going to share my screen and throw this PowerPoint up here. Okay, all right, and this is coming through for everybody. All right. Well, it will come as no surprise to anyone in this group. Let me move this down here, but we are a planet in crisis. Everybody knows the list of challenges that we are currently facing. We are confronting an escalating climate crisis, growing droughts and forest fires, more flooding and stronger hurricanes. Our reservoirs are drying up and water tables are collapsing. Rising sea levels, research is now showing us that we have already baked in by 2050, a 12 foot rise in the oceans, and we know from projections what that means in terms of changing club flood, coast lines and eco refugees. We are facing the worst species extinction since the extinction of the dinosaurs. We're dealing with fist fished out oceans. These extreme economic inequality and unstable interlocked national economies and weapons so powerful we dare not use them. We are, in essence, world on fire. We are entering a time of planetary emergency. Is up here a little bit. There we go, of planetary emergency, and it's happening much faster than we ever thought it would even 10 years ago.

Chris Bache  5:34  
Umar hot

Chris Bache  5:36  
egg, a British economist, wrote an essay recently, we're not going to make it to 2050 in which he says, quote, skyrocketing inflation, growing shortages, runaway temperatures, killing heat, failing harvest, shattered systems, continents on fire and masses turning to lunacy, theocracy and fascism As a result, this is the condition we find ourselves in today. What I'd like to do is offer a perspective on these events that comes from my psychedelic experiences reported in my book, LSD, in the mind of the universe. So first, I'd like to give a short overview, to give a context for the visionary experiences that I'm going to be sharing with you today. I'm going to be touching on my psychedelic work and the book, LSD in the mind of the universe, but I'm not going to go into it in great detail, except for that portion of the Book having to do with the birth of the future human, and you'll get a sense of it from my initial comments. And if you'd like to invite me back for another time, we can spend the time going into the overview of the book more deeply. Let's begin.

Chris Bache  6:58  
Yeah, here we go.

Chris Bache  6:59  
Should have thrown that up earlier. All right, here we go. Now. My work derives from Stan grofs work, and these two books changed the course of my life. I finished graduate school in 1978 and read realms of the human unconscious at that time, and my life pivoted. I did the work that I eventually did as a philosopher, not a psychologist, not a therapist. I was primarily trained in philosophy of religion, and was interested in the philosophical potential of psychedelics to explore the deep structure of consciousness, and through that, the deep structure of the universe itself. Now in his work, Stan differentiates clearly two different types of working, psychedelic therapy, low dose psyche lytic therapy and high dose psychedelic therapy. Psychedelic therapy, as it was practiced at Spring Grove Hospital in Baltimore was restricted to three sessions. Here they were working with terminally ill cancer patients, and the focus was to try to trigger something which approximated a near death episode, to help them with death anxiety. They weren't trying to heal them. They were trying to help them with with the anxiety that arose, arises when it's one is facing death. So I thought, Well, okay, if you can do high dose work three times, you can do it more than three times. And what I ended up doing was 73 high dose LSD sessions between 1979 and 1999 and now this is a very aggressive protocol. It's not one that I would recommend today, knowing what I know today, I would do it differently, where I starting over again, but that's just what I did. I did this work as systematically and rigorously as I could. I followed the same protocol, and this is a therapeutic focus. I was always lying down with eye shades, with a sitter. I use the same substance, the same dose level, the same set and setting, same sitter, same recording process, even the same location. All of these variables can influence one's experiences in Non-ordinary states. So it was a very stable position from which to engage in the dialog with the universe and communion with the universe. I saw myself at the time simply doing an extended course of psychedelic therapy, but when I got to the end of this work and was looking back over it as a whole, I realized that there was something different going on than was described in the early literature on psychedelic therapy. This the protocol may be the same, but when you extend. The number of sessions, as many as I did, it really unfolds into different challenges and gives you different opportunities to engage the universe. So I gave my work a different name, and I call it psychedelic exploration. The protocol is psychedelic therapy. All internalized sessions, all working with supportive music, so on, so forth. The difference is the number of sessions. In my case, 73 sessions. Now let me clarify further. Just I think it's important to differentiate, especially since there are many different uses of psychedelics, let me just mention three of them. The first is the therapeutic the use of psychedelics for therapeutic healing, which is, of course, our current focus in the psychedelic Renaissance taking place. Now. Second to that is using psychedelics for spiritual awakening, not quite the same as therapeutic healing, but somewhat different. And this is actually why I initially got into this work. Was to accelerate what I thought of as my individual spiritual enlightenment, but the protocol I adopted was so powerful that it really took me beyond healing and beyond spiritual awakening into a process that I would describe as cosmic, logical exploration. I did this work to explore the deep structure of the cosmos itself. I did this work as a philosopher. I wouldn't do it the same way if I were doing it again, and I do not advise people to do what I did. But I came through it. I survived it reasonably intact. And now I'd like to share some of the results from this work. I kept very careful, detailed records of my sessions, always within 24 hours of every session. And I'd like to give a little bit of context for the visions that I'll be sharing. When you do this work, you go through a Death-Rebirth process that everybody is familiar with. The first one is, is ego death. And this line here represents the the horizontal line represents the line between physical matter and spiritual reality are between ordinary consciousness and Transpersonal consciousness. And the open line represents the vast expanse it opens to us in Non-ordinary states of consciousness, and the drop at the bottom of the line represents our individual egoic awareness. And that first circle, that red circle, represents the Death-Rebirth process that takes place in psychedelic work, egoic death and any spiritual practice where one is transitioning one opens one's consciousness beyond our individual ego into the vast expanse that lies beyond individual awareness. Now Ego Death catches most of the attention in the literature today, but what I found in my work is that if you work consistently with a very powerful methodology like I did, you go through not one death, but many deaths. As one goes deeper and deeper into the universe, one comes to a series of thresholds, a series of gateways, where one must go through yet another death in order to enter into this deeper level of existence. And it isn't simply a repetition of ego death. It's really different, a different kind of death that reflects the different levels of reality. One is working at Stan. Differentiation is writing between psychic levels of Transpersonal experience, subtle levels and causal levels. And I'm going to use that language. I use that language in my book, but I don't have any vested interest in any particular cosmology or cosmic logical ladder. It's the principle that is important that the universe has many levels, and as one enters into those levels systematic, if you do it systematically, there is a gradual unfolding level by level as one goes deeper into the universe and into these states of consciousness, at least, that's how it manifested in my work. It doesn't necessarily have to be that way for everybody, but that's the way it manifested for me. Now, when I got to the end of my work and was beginning to crunch all of my experiences and beginning to prepare for the writing that I did, on the basis of those experiences, I differentiated five fundamental levels or categories of experience, or levels of kind. Consciousness that my work unfolded into. The first was one's personal mind, one's personal unconscious. The second is the species mind, or the collective unconscious. The third is archetypal mind,

Chris Bache  15:18  
the fourth causal oneness

Chris Bache  15:21  
and the fifth diamond Luminosity. And let me just very quickly go through and place the chapters of my book in that context. Just to give you a context for what we're talking about, there's a chapter on crossing the boundaries death, which is basically telling the story of crossing what Stan Grof calls the perennial level of consciousness. It 10 sessions and two and a half years of work on the species mind. There is a chapter called the ocean of suffering, and a chapter called deep time in the soul. And it took me a total of about four years to get to this point in my work, and at that point, I stopped my work for six years for reasons that I give in the book, and I resumed it six years later, and when I did the purification part of my session, which was the ocean of suffering, began exactly where it had stopped six years previous. And I won't go into I can't explain all of this in detail, but the ocean of suffering was opening up to vast territories of collective pain and anguish, which I first thought of as a deepening of ego death, but I later came to understand that I was tapping into or that something was guiding in me, in my sessions, to tap into the memories of our collective suffering that our species still stores in the collective psyche, anything which is not integrated at the end of an individual life gets stored at the level of the collective psyche. And the patient in this work had become not just me, but the patient had expanded to become, in some way, the entire species of my family. When I resumed my work after the six year hiatus, the ocean of suffering began exactly where it had stopped, but in the ecstatic portion of my sessions, I entered a series of initiatory experiences where I was taken by the universe and given a series of cosmic logical initiations. It was like cosmology, 101, teaching me how the universe is organized and structured in certain ways. Eventually, this work came to a culmination. I went through yet another death and rebirth process and entered what I came to call archetype of mind, the greater real in the chapter, the greater real, archetypal reality. And here I talk about the quasi platonic level of archetypal consciousness and the quasi Jung Ian level. And I say quasi platonic because it was it affirmed Plato's core insight, that there was a reality behind the reality of time and space which ordered time and space. But I did not experience archetypes the way Plato experienced them. I did not experience them as eternal ideas in the mind of an unchanging God, but I experienced them as vast, living, dynamic, cosmic, logical process, processes that were so large I could not wrap my mind around them. At the quasi Jung Ian level, I experienced repeatedly dissolving into the species mind, and I was given repeated instructions on how the collective unconscious, or how the species mind functions as an integrated whole, that all of our individual minds are wired into this vast collective mind, and our individual psychological issues and even our physical diseases are part of the psychological stresses and strains and even the diseases of our entire species, and that our individual healing directly contributes, both physically and psychologically To the healing of our species. Then this work culminated, after 18 months, into yet another death and rebirth process which took me into causal oneness, which I describe in a chapter called a benediction of blessings, where I was given a year of extra ordinary life. Blessings of oneness, of non dual consciousness, of Shunyata dissolving into the meta cosmic void, experiences of profound cosmic love. It was truly totally existentially life, satisfying time. And then I entered into the five years, the last five years of my work, the diamond Luminosity work, described in the chapter the diamond Luminosity here, I entered beyond the collective psyche beyond even the oneness of existence into a super, rarefied celestial domain of exquisite diamond light. Now, I had known light many times up to this point, but this was a higher order of light than I had ever encountered before. All right, I'll just stop there. And and then I came into the final piece of work, the final year of work, the final vision, which then led to the last chapter. Whoop. Let me back up the last chapter, chapter 12, coming off the mountain. Now, you see, I've skipped a chapter here, and that's the chapter I really want to focus on today, the birth of the future human. I really wish I had written this in a different order. The order should be a benediction of blessings, and then the diamond Luminosity, and then the birth of the future human, followed by the final vision. But, ah, well, this is the order in which I wrote it. In the birth of the I summarize a series of visions, experiences that I was given over many years. In the work, I kind of pulled them all out of different sessions and consolidated them into this particular story, the birth of the future human. All of those sessions that are summarized in this chapter actually began as far back as the initiation into the universe, material and so on and so forth. But I really focus them the story of her simplicity in this particular chapter. So what I'd like to do now is focus on this theme of the birth of the future human. And there are three components, two of them we're going to focus on today. The first one is a series of visions that I call vision of awakening. It's a series of visions that I was given between 1991 and 1994 so you can see how long ago this was. This goes back over 30 years, visions of where humanity was in its evolutionary development. This was followed by a major session that I call the Great Awakening session, which took place in 1995 which was then later followed by the final vision that that occurred in the 70th session, very near the end of my 20 year journey. So what I want to focus on today is the visions of awakening and the Great Awakening. So first, the visions paper over the course of my work dropped into my session. Scattered throughout my sessions was a series of visions that kept coming back to this theme of human evolution. Kept describing the city a situation that humanity was entering and a turning point that humanity was coming to in its evolutionary destiny. And I organized these visions into a series of six visions, which I give these names, the visions of divine love, all humanity, guiding intelligence, our species as a single being, collective purification

Chris Bache  24:29  
and the future human.

Chris Bache  24:32  
So what I'd like to do is just go back first and read you some excerpts from these visions. And I can talk about these visions, but I think it might be maybe a deeper way to transmit the content of these experiences by actually sort of sharing some of the visionary material themselves. And I invite you to enter into a receptive state. State, you're welcome to close your eyes, a receptive state where you can hear what I'm going to be sharing with you from a deeper than simply rational place in your consciousness. Now I should tell you that my sense is what I'm doing with you is reminding you of something that you already know. What's it's not important that I had these visions. If these are significant, it's because of what they tell us about humanity and what they tell us about all of us and all of the work that we are doing as we incarnate in this generation. So first divine love in this session, which dates back to 1991 I was taken back to the beginning of creation and their experienced evolution in the context of a larger cosmic agenda. Suddenly, I was overwhelmed by the most extraordinary cosmic love, a love unlike anything I had ever known. To awaken to this love was to remember a primordial decision that I had somehow participated in. In fact, I came to understand that all of us had voluntarily chosen to be part of the evolutionary process of creation in response to this divine love, I then experienced all the suffering that humanity had endured throughout history as taking place inside this love, I realized that all the suffering inherent in evolution was noble beyond words, it was all part of a cosmic plan that we had entered into voluntarily along the Way, and even we had entered into freely, however unconscious of this fact we had become along the way, nobility of great suffering, voluntarily shouldered in the name of Divine Love, suffering that would stretch across millions of years, suffering that would become so inscrutable that it would be used as evidence that the universe was devoid of compassion. This was the nobility of humanity's gift to the creative intelligence of the universe. All of the suffering that humanity had endured and will endure in the decades ahead, you're part of a conscious

Chris Bache  27:48  
there are no victims here.

Chris Bache  27:52  
Second theme of all humanity, the quote from the session,

Chris Bache  28:01  
the great difficulty I have is describing the enormity of what is being birthed. The true focus of this creative process is not individuals, but all humanity. It is actually trying to awaken the entire species out of the seething desires of history, out of the violent conflicts and scheming of individuals and nations, there was now driving forward a new awareness in human consciousness. Its birth in us is no less difficult or violent than the birth of a new continent. It drives upward from the floor of our being, requiring a transposition of everything that has gone before in order to make room for its new organizational patterns. What is emerging in history is a consciousness of unprecedented proportions, the entire human family, integrated in a unified field of awareness, the species reconnected with its fundamental nature. Our thoughts tuned to Source consciousness. The scale of what I was witnessing took my breath away. The third set of visions. I saw humanity climbing out of a steep valley, and just ahead on the other side of the mountain was a brilliant, sun drenched world that was about to break over us. The timeframe was enormous, and I should mention, perhaps it should have mentioned sooner that time became very porous in my work. First time opened up in terms of my personal life, but then time opened up in terms of our species life. I. Planetary life and the life of the cosmos itself. So I was regularly taken into vast, trans temporal landscapes. After millions of years of struggle and ascent, we were poised on the brink of a sunrise that would forever change the condition of life on this planet, all current structures would quickly become irrelevant. All truths would quickly be rendered passe. Truly, a new epoch was dawning. The lives of everyone living in this pivotal time in history were helping to bring this global shift about as I witnessed this scene, I saw that, though we did not know the deep future at a personal level, there was a more encompassing level of consciousness that could see it very Clearly. This was a deeply moving and clarifying experience, individually, we humans could not see what was coming, and so did not understand why things are the way they are, yet isolated from the future the present makes absolutely no sense to be ignorant of what is being built would be to be fundamentally blind, and our species is not blind. There is an intelligence in it, preparing us, guiding us, an intelligence that knows the future and is preparing us for it as systematically as we prepare our homes for the changes of seasons, next our species, as a single being, I was taken deeper into the unified field of existence and experienced the dynamics of humanity's awakening as movements being initiated and orchestrated by a single integrating intelligence. I experienced the evolution of our species at the systematic growth of a single organism, a unified being that all of us were part of the subtlety of the cooperation of the parts with the whole was extra ordinary to experience the incredible diversity of our species as a single unified field made many events clear. New patterns sprang into view, and the patterns made transparent sense. Nothing in our theological or philosophical systems does justice to the facts. What I then saw was that the unified field of humanity was moving decisively and precipitously to become more aware of itself. Whereas previously it had existed in an essence, in as an extended fabric, largely unconscious of itself. Now it was waking itself up visually. This took the form of energy coming together in Swift, contractive spasms that created bright flashes of awareness. I repeatedly saw extended webs of energy suddenly contract and explode in brilliant flashes. In the past, these flashes had been swallowed by the inertia of the collective psyche and had not endured now, however, the flashes were beginning to hold their own and to connect with each other, with other flashes occurring around the planet.

Chris Bache  34:02  
The visions address collective purification, which I think is a particularly important concept in order to understand what's happening in history, in this century, when an organism is called on from within to become more conscious, it must first cleanse itself of the psychological byproducts of living at its lower level of awareness. It was bring forward the residue of its past and purge that residue from its system in order to lay the foundation for a more refined level of operation. Our system, our species, was doing this in a wholesale manner and with great determination, by crystallizing within itself generations that embodied our toxic legacy. It was the coordinated exercise of the self evolution of the species as a whole. The poisons of humanity's past were being brought to the surface in us, and by transforming these poisons in our individual lives, we were making it possible for divine awareness to enter more deeply into future generations. We had volunteered for this role for both our personal good and the collective good. I saw that this century formed a watershed into which the karmic streams of history were flowing, and that as the process came to fruition, the future condition of our species would be beyond anything that we might project from our current state of fragmentation. The present form of humanity is transitional. As Sri Aurobindo said, we are cells in a super organism intent on rapid change our very constitution, the form of our species is a stage in a larger evolutionary journey. Lastly, the future human. At one point, I was given a brief experience of the future human we are becoming. I was carried deep into the distant future and allowed to experience what will be the abiding state of humanity at that time, what a magnificent being. Just touching it filled me with rapture, calm and sheer delight. It felt clear, warm and whole. There was an abiding sense of oneness that was deeper than just the feeling of being interconnected. It was a feeling of being truly one underneath the diversity of life, such expansiveness, such breath of being. It was spiritually embodied realization, the tantric awakening of our entire species, spirit and matter in perfect balance. This penetrating glimpse transfixed me. Its beauty, grandeur and simplicity pierced my heart, the net result of all of these experiences was to give me a deep understanding of the challenge that humanity was entering, the challenging period of history that we were ending, and what was going on underneath the surface of historical events. And it focused me on the question, how can the entire species be awakened, as I've seen, what would it actually take for the whole of humanity to make this quantum jump in awareness? I had been shown over and over again in many different forms, that this was the project of history at this point, but nowhere was I shown how it would be accomplished.

Chris Bache  38:28  
At this point,

Chris Bache  38:30  
I entered into the diamond Luminosity work, where about once a year, once every five sessions or so, I entered into a deep state of mystical absorption into the crystalline body of the Divine. I had entered into two such experiences in the 40th and 45th sessions, and I was expecting in the next session, the 55th session, to enter into the diamond Luminosity. Again, instead, that's that's not what happened. Instead, in 1995 as my family and I were preparing for the Christmas holidays, I had experience of in a session in that I came to call the Great Awakening session. I experienced what I'm going to describe, not as an individual, but as the entire species. I had been dissolved into the collective unconscious so many times and at so many different levels, and all of that seemed to be preparation for what unfolded itself in this session. This session was so deep and so challenging and so difficult to navigate that it really took years for me to assimilate it fully into my life.

Chris Bache  39:58  
I was dissolved.

Chris Bache  40:00  
Into the collective psyche, and I experienced what humanity as a whole would experience in the decades ahead. So let me share with you the core scenario pulled out of this visionary experience in a field of relative calm, a small anxiety began to grow. Slowly, people were looking up and becoming alarmed. Humanity was gradually waking up in alarm to events that had overtaken it. Conditions got worse and worse. People became more and more frightened as the danger increased, forcing them to let go of their assumptions. At deeper and deeper levels, there was less and less people for people to hold on to, fewer Givens that they could assume, how they would live, where they would live, what they would do for a living, how society was organized, what could be possessed. The world as they knew it was falling away. Decades were compressed into minutes, and I felt the people's fear deepen as they had more, as they lost more and more of what they had considered the normal and necessary structures of their world, step by step, events were forcing a rapid reassessment of everything in their lives. The events that had overtaken earth were of such scope that no one could insulate themselves from them. The level of alarm grew in the species field, until eventually, everyone was forced into the melting pot of mere survival. We were all in this together. Families were torn apart, parents from children, their children and children from each other. Life as we had known, it was shattered at the core. We were reduced to simply trying to survive. For a time, it looked as though we would all be killed. But just when the storm was at its peak, the worst of it passed, and the danger slowly subsided. Though many had died, many were still alive. As the survivors began to find each other, new social units began to form. Parents and children from different families joined to form new types of families everywhere, new social institutions sprang into being that reflected our new reality, new ways of thinking, new values that we had discovered within ourselves during the crisis. Every aspect of our lives was marked by new priorities, new perceptions of the good, new truths these new social forms reflected new states of awareness that seemed to spread through the survivors like a positive contagion. These new social forms then fed back into the system to elicit still newer sites, states of awareness in people and the cycle of creativity between the individual and the group spiraled the entire system was becoming alive at new levels, and this aliveness was expressing itself in previously impossible ways. It was as if the Eco crisis had triggered the myelinization of nerve cells in our species brain, allowing new and deeper levels of self awareness to spring into being repeatedly. There was the message, these things will happen faster than anyone can anticipate because of the hyper arousal of the species mind, 1000s of fractal images drove this lesson home again and again faster than anyone can anticipate. The pace of the past was irrelevant to the pace of the future and

Chris Bache  44:24  
my visions did not give me any details about how or when this would take place, except that we were entering a profound global systems crisis that was being triggered by a series of of ecological crises around the planet, and this was of a scale and a magnitude that was historically unprecedented. I was also shown many teachings that I won't go into now, but are in dark net, early dawn, and in LSD, in the mind of the. Universe. That point that showed me, gave me insights into the dynamics of the collective psyche, that basically, the suffering that we were entering into was so widespread and so profound that it would impact not just individuals, but it would actually reach through the lives of the individuals to impact the collective unconscious itself, and it would drive the collective psyche into what a scientist might call non linear conditions. And just as physical systems, when they are driven into non linear conditions, can do remarkable things, seemingly impossible things. Likewise, the human psyche, the collective psyche, when driven into non linear conditions, hyper aroused by the suffering of its people. In that condition, it was capable of doing previously impossible things. In this respect, the suffering that we are entering into, and it's certainly not punishment, and it's not a sign of failure, but it's actually instrumental in helping us let go of the past and let go of our narrow, petty, egoic history and enter into A deeper communion with the creative process of the universe. Now this brings me to the next question of, what form will the future human take? Because I think we are going through a transformation which is so deep, it's not simply a civilizational turning point, and it's not simply a destruction and rebirth of our economy and our industrial culture to a greener planet and a greener culture and a greener body politic. It is a transformation which is actually reaching deep into the fundamental substructure of the human psyche. The crisis we are entering is a crisis of consciousness. In that respect, it's an evolutionary consciousness, because we can no longer afford the luxury of a planet which is being run by egos with this sense of separate private our separate private existences, even well intentioned egos, we need to grow into a deeper, more mature sense of self for this planet, in my Understanding, my context for understanding the future human is reincarnation. Now, my first book life cycles was about reincarnation. I considered an absolutely fundamental concept, and I think it's a concept which we have ample empirical evidence to document. I think that the issue of reincarnation has, over the last 50 years, moved from a speculative theological table to an empirical psychological table. I think Ian Stevenson and other researchers have given us a vast quantity of evidence that should convince any clear thinking, critical person that reincarnation is a fact of life. But in the course of my sessions, I was given an understanding of reincarnation that seemed to go beyond the way that idea is presented in the Eastern and even Western mystical traditions, classically, reincarnation is presented as a an individual form of individual evolution, where we make choices, we inherit the consequences of those choices. We grow incrementally, step by step, becoming more compassionate, more respectful, more intelligent over long, long periods and 1000s of lifetimes, but eventually mature into a spiritual awakening. We come into a spiritual awakening where we make contact with we resume a deep experience of our inner, divine nature, and at that point, we can leave time and space. The Hindu term for this experience was moksha, escape, escape, not only from ego, but escape from time and space itself. In Buddhism, Nirvana is followed at death by the deeper state of pari Nirvana, final Nirvana, which is carrying on beyond a type of enlightenment that goes beyond physical existence. All of the cosmology of the last 5000 years, and both Western and Eastern traditions, have been basically what I would call up and out cosmology, the goal. Goal is to achieve some type of fundamental transition, either salvation or enlightenment, so that when you die, you can leave time and space behind. But that leaves, of course, unanswered the question, what is the purpose of space and time to begin with? What does creative intelligence, when, before the creative intelligence manifested space and time. What? What was it thinking? Why did it do so? What is the purpose of space, time itself, the understanding of reincarnation and the experience of reincarnation that developed in my sessions basically outlined a different trajectory. There was one particular session where and I had done, I had done past life therapy, and I was familiar with the number of my previous lives, and I had worked in healing them, and I had written life cycles 20 years before, but I came into a session where suddenly all my former lives began to come into me and to begin to wrap themselves around me. It was like wrapping a filament of white light around a kite spool, until eventually all of those lives fused into one, and when they fused into one, a brilliant diamond light exploded from my chest, and I was catapulted into a state of consciousness far beyond anything that I had ever experienced before. Up to that time, I was both an individual, but I was an individual within a frame of within a context and a frame of consciousness beyond anything that I had ever known previously. And I came to call this the birth of the diamond soul. And I think this is the fundamental trajectory of human evolution that we have been incarnating for 1000s and 1000s and hundreds of 1000s of years. We and in this evolutionary process, we have been growing and growing and growing, and we are coming to a point where the next step in our evolutionary development is not simply taking one more evolutionary step in this long evolutionary progression. But actually is a a fusion, a coming into an integrating, first healing and then integrating all of our former lives into a single consciousness, a consciousness that we can call the soul, the consciousness. I think we return to soul consciousness after we die, after incarnation, we expand into the soul. We contract into egoic awareness. We expand into the soul. We contract. And if we keep this up over and over again, 1000s and 1000s of years, eventually, sooner or later, the soul, the large consciousness that holds all of our experience, awakens inside time and space. And when the soul awakens inside time and space, heaven is born on earth, and there is no felt need to go elsewhere. I think all of the up and out cosmiclogies are basically incomplete. Cosmiclogies That made sense in the time in the context in which they were born, but I think they are an incomplete vision of what the project of existence is

Chris Bache  53:43  
young souls become old souls. Old Souls eventually become complete souls, and that's what I think of as the birth of the diamond soul. Now many people have had these visions. They have had this understanding. They use different words to describe it. Some people talk about Homo noeticus, homo luminous, homo spiritualis. But there are so many people who have this deep intuition that we are on the cusp of a major transition in the human story. And I think this transition is literally the birth of the diamond soul inside history. And this is taking place not just for individuals, not just with individuals, but it's taking place for the entire species. We are in the process of giving birth to a new species on this planet, and the nature of this species is implicit in the history that we have, that we bring to this event in order to solve the crisis that we are entering into in history, we. We desperately need to grow up as a species. In this context, from a reincarnational perspective, growing up means owning and integrating the larger consciousness that has been gestating within us for 1000s of years, owning it, seeing the world through its eyes, and letting its accumulated wisdom shape our choices. The soul lives in history differently than the ego. The soul knows that its relationship with this planet extends beyond the limits of its present life. It knows that the earth we leave behind is that the is the earth we will inherit in our next incarnation. It knows this, and it acts accordingly. So to summarize, the core vision that came through my sessions, humanity, I think, is coming into a time of profound transformation, a time of planetary compression and accelerated development, a deep shift in the collective unconsciousness of our species is taking place, a shift in the archetypal blueprint of humanity, a shift that's taking place Literally, kind of in the it's a plate tectonic shift in the collective psyche. And one way of describing this is a it is a profound awakening into the truth of oneness, but not an awakening that dissolves the individual, but awakening that liberates the individual into a deeper and higher sense of participation in not only the human community, but also into the Celestial community. For there to be a great awakening like this, there must first take place a great death, and this death is all about purification. It's all about letting go, healing and letting go of all the terrible things that we've done to each other, for all the attitudes that have divided oneness, and all the the hatreds and the animosities and the racism and the genderism and the speciesism that has clouded the earlier stages of human evolution. We must surrender our smallness, the ego's constant self, cherishing with all of its divisions between people, races, religions, classes, nations and even species, I believe we are entering the dark, a dark night of our collective soul, a time of emptying, a time of intense anguish, of progressive loss of control and systematic breakdown, a Time of global purification unto death that will last generations. But through this hard labor, we will give birth to something extra ordinary, more than just a new civilization. What is emerging is nothing less than a new order of human being through the global systems crisis, our planet is giving birth to the future human, a higher form of humanity, the diamond soul, is being born in history, and we are All part of this transformation. Thank you very much.

Chris Bache  58:44  
Yeah, okay, I'll stop this year now. Yeah, wow,

Speaker 1  58:57  
that was amazing, Chris, thank you so much. I mean, I personally know the truth of what you're saying from my own intuitions and my own brief experiences. Yeah, well, thank you so much. So let's open it up. Let's take a take a minute to breathe, I guess, and then let's open it to questions and conversation. Yeah,

Speaker 2  59:25  
and if you'd like to start just unmute and speak,

Chris Bache  59:30  
yeah, I really do see myself just reminding you of things you already know, things you knew before you incarnated. My sense is that everybody chooses, every one of us has chosen to incarnate voluntarily, that we chose the incarnation that we are now in knowing beforehand what we are getting into. We may have forgotten once we incarnate, but we knew before we were born, and we will remember. When we die, it's that we are all carefully placed in order to participate in this collective transformation.

Chris Bache  1:00:13  
Beautiful, Chris, this whoops.

Jonai  1:00:21  
This is Janae, and I this is absolutely beautiful. And I kept thinking all the way through, what do I do with what I just learned in terms of science and the new DNA testing that's been done, epigenetics, the fact that we have the same genome as the what's called inadequate and anatomically modern humans back in the 200,000 period time and What, and what I'm coming to is that this is all. This is all when it when it actually comes out. I mean, most people don't even know about it yet, but when it actually comes out, it's preparing us. It's preparing it's giving us what we have right now, and it's giving us the opportunity to move on from there. That's kind of the way I look at it. And I the one thing I kept thinking all the way through, how long is this going to take? And you answered it in the end, it's going to go through several generations, or maybe many generations. But this is where we this is where we jump off and fly and move.

Chris Bache  1:01:40  
And, you know, I don't have any visionary experience of how long or the how or the details I wasn't given that kind of detail. So for that, I have to go to the experts like everybody else. I have to go to the scientists who are really plotting the escalating climate crisis that we are entering in the social sciences who are looking at the broader social and political ramifications of these crises. But my sense is that the 21st Century is pivotal. I mean by by 2020, by 2050, well, first, let me recommend, and you notice that I haven't talked about, what can we do? How do we respond to this crisis? How do we participate in it? And we can talk about that. But one of the people who has thought extensively about this and written about it beautifully is Dwayne Elgin, and his latest book, his most recent book is his book choosing Earth, and he's a social activist. He's an evolutionary thinker and a futurist, and his wife has created a film based on the book called facing adversity, choosing Earth. And it's both. He's Dwayne is giving away the book and his wife is giving away the film. You can find, you can get a PDF from Amazon on the book, and you can find the film online in the in the book Dwayne outlines what science is say, telling us about the next five decades, you know, and each of those decades, the crisis deepens precipitously, and we are now in the decade of the the great on the falling the falling apart, beginning of a sense of falling apart. Institutional value systems are falling apart. This will continue to accelerate into the great unraveling. I'm sorry. Let me back the great unraveling followed by the falling apart, followed by the deep crash. By the time we get to 2050 we're going to be looking at a deeply, profoundly different world than we are now. And so my sense is that this this crisis of near extinction. And because we are looking at, you know, when you really look at the people who are looking at the numbers and how many billions of human beings are going to likely to be dying as we run into shortfall of harvest, and so on and so forth, we are looking at a near extinction event, and extinction is a tremendous accelerator of evolution. So my sense is, if we don't make it this transition in this century or close to this century, we very well might not make it at all. So I do expect it to take several generations, but I do expect the 21st Century to be focal in this transition.

Chris Bache  1:04:45  
Thank you.

Chris Bache  1:04:47  
Thank you. Jean, I see that you have your hand up.

Chris Bache  1:04:55  
You're on mute. Jean, i. Me

Jean Fox  1:05:07  
there. Sorry about that. There you go. Yeah, I mentioned in the chat that in 2007 I met a Chandler who who wrote about this and in a lot of detail, and he gives it, gives all, gives it for free. We'll share his information for free. It's not for profit, but it's just that it's, it's nature cleansing itself in preparing us for the next step. And we're all we're always stuck in our minds, but what we need to do is be present with each other, says the in the who's ever going to be left through all these processes? We just have to show up for each other and solve the problems and moment by moment, because all we have is each moment. And if we're stuck in our minds and isolating from each other, in our houses, in our jobs, we're not going to be there to support each other. Look what's happened in Kentucky or any of these places where there's a disaster, we're in the middle of a disaster. In the disaster isn't it's not time for planning, it's time for doing. So we have to really just, when somebody needs something, do it for them. Help what, whatever we can do to help each other, because it's hard, yeah, yeah.

Chris Bache  1:06:47  
We have to become the human being that the world needs right now, both on an internal level, we have to face our shadow. We have to heal our shadow. We have to become more whole within our souls, but also on a political level, on a social level, I think there's a synergy between the world is trying to become one, to grow past the nation status, the nation state idea, it's trying to become one. And there's a synergy between our in our soul is trying to become one. We carry the history of humanity inside us, as well as our society carrying it outside of us. So as the world is trying to become one, we are trying to become one. There's a synergistic dance between inner and outer here, and so this are stepping into this means stepping into it, and each of us has a little bit of a different way of stepping into it, because we all carry a different karmic agenda. We all undertook different responsibilities as we incarnated. There is both an internal and an external, a psychological and a social dimension to this transformational process.

Jean Fox  1:08:03  
And we are. We are the Earth. Yeah, of the Earth, we're so we're tending, tending our gardens. And this other channel that I was talking about. His name is John tettmer, says we're going back to an agrarian society, whatever, whatever humanity is left to be one with the earth, to be work in harmony with the earth, and evolve again from there in A equal, symbiotic Yeah, instead of raping.

Chris Bache  1:08:44  
And in that context, let me just mention that some people have asked me, Why do you focus on human beings so much and don't talk about experiences of other species? And of course, many people who work with psychedelics in a shamanic kind of context of many experiences of with other species, and that I've had a few of those experience. But the main track for me has been working with the humans, the collective human psyche. And I think this is because humanity is the greatest threat to life on this planet right now. And if we can heal the human species, then all the other species on the planet will be safe. And it's not that I don't respect I don't think they're inferior to human beings or so on so forth. They absolutely are just as precious as human beings are. But in order to ensure their well being, we have to heal humanity.

Jonai  1:09:44  
We're the ones that are destroying them. Yes,

Chris Bache  1:09:48  
they were here first. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  1:09:51  
So Regina, you have your hand up,

Regina  1:09:53  
yes. Thank you so much. I wanted to know how you. Do it differently, that you would do it differently. Now I'm just curious.

Chris Bache  1:10:12  
I would vary the dose level. I would work with high doses sometimes, but low doses at other times, I would also balance LSD with other psychedelics like Psilocybin or Ayahuasca. Each of those psychedelics, all of them, have in common the amplifying effect of amplifying the sensitivity of consciousness, but they do so in slightly different ways, they kind of bring out different aspects of the spectrum of consciousness. So that LSD tends to sort of drive towards the high cosmic logic ceiling. Psilocybin tends to sort of be work closer to the emotional body, closer to the physical body. Ayahuasca tends to do that as well and bridge a little bit step farther and deeper out. So I would balance high doses versus low doses, synthetic psychedelics and organic psychedelics. And I don't think there is a fundamental core difference between synthetic and organic psychedelics, but I would just differentiate those two here. And one of the other reasons I would do it differently is because I thought, when I began this work, first, I thought this was all about my personal transformation. Well, well that was that went out the window. It's not about personal transformation, it's about our collective transformation. But I also thought that the goal was to get to some end state. You know, people talked about becoming one with God, or becoming entering into the primal void, or somehow reaching some end condition. And so I drove hard to reach that end condition. But the way it worked is that every time I would get into what appeared to be a homecoming state or an absolutely soul satisfying existential bliss, by keeping driving, I would be taken into yet another level of consciousness and yet another level of consciousness, until eventually, I had one pivotal experience in my 50th session, where I was shown that it's an infinite progression. You'll never reach the end of it. The Divine fabric is an infinite fabric, and that's so one of the reasons I would, I would do it differently, is because I'm, I think the goal is not to reach some destination or some end state. The goal is to become transparent and to let as much of the of the Divine into our lives as possible, and to live in that abiding and to deepen that abiding communion. So I'm I was a young man when I did this work. I'm a little more patient with the slower methods of transformation than I was when I did it. Thank you for that, because I've been coming to that realization myself. And it's like there is no end. It's forever. It is forever that, in itself, is very difficult to put your mind around. It's like, yeah, yeah.

Regina  1:13:28  
So that was, I guess I would for myself, say that is the ultimate surrender to be able to do

Chris Bache  1:13:34  
that. Yeah. And whatever transition we're going through in this next 100 years, or whenever, whatever we're going through, it's not the end point for the human story, right? We're going to be on this planet for millions and millions of more years if we survive this potential extinction event. And so we're going to keep growing. We're going to go beyond the diamond soul. We're going to keep growing and growing and growing. The creative intelligence of the universe does not seem to think in small scale. It thinks its landscape is vast. It thinks in galactic proportions. It thinks in magnitudes of time, far beyond what we've even begun to try to conceptualize in our religious traditions of the world. I think science has basically erased the Blackboard and given us a completely larger landscape, which as our experience of this landscape deepens, we're going to have a deeper understanding of the intelligence that saturates this landscape, in a way that even science is a hard time admitting today, but it's getting there.

Regina  1:14:45  
Yeah, just the thing of impatience alone, just that one thing alone. Yeah, how different it would be if we really, truly were just able to be, yeah.

Speaker 1  1:14:58  
Yeah. That, Victoria, you have your hand up,

Chris Bache  1:15:03  
yeah. Well, you keep moving around on my screen. Boy, I just was such a deep experience. Felt like every cell in my body was saying yes, and so I wonder if did two questions that are personal, so if you'd be willing to talk about it, just your ability to really trust what has your experience has been and what has been shown to you, and then how you incorporate that, I guess, in the moments of your life, you know, it's it's like, okay, what do we do this moment, next moment, next moment.

Chris Bache  1:15:52  
No. One of the things, one of the great gifts I got from Stan Grof was the understanding that when you go into these deep, cathartic, high, amplified states of consciousness, you're going to start to go into get into stormy weather, you're going to get into hard, challenging circumstances. Things are going to unravel on you, and you're going to have an instinct to pull back. You know, this is a bad trip. You just don't want to be here. This is a terrible, terrible terrible thing to happen, but if you are willing to embrace it, if you give yourself over to it, if you let it take you wherever it wants to take you, even though you do not understand it at all, you do not understand what's happening. You don't understand the logic of the whole thing. But if you surrender to it, it'll take you into a crisis, which eventually peaks, and then some part of you will fall away. You'll you'll go through some type of death, and then you will awaken into a different reality, as a different being with a different set of capacities in a deeper level of the universe, so that you learn to trust the cycle. It is a cycle process so that you you open, you engage, you surrender, and then you are reborn, and you bring back the entire cycle of both the trauma and the ecstatic rebirth. So that is a that develops a kind of trust, which you learn by practicing it. You learn by doing it. And today, now, as I have backed away from doing this work, I mean, I stopped my intense work in 99 so I've had a long time to live with those experiences, which will bring me to your second question. And as I've watched the shadows of history deepen, I have to fall back on this deep trust. And I mean, it's I fall back on it because I don't know how the universe is going to work out. What I've just seen tips of I don't know how it's going to do it and and my heart reaches out in compassion to the billions of people that are on the planet going through very, very challenging circumstances. In the end, you either trust or you don't trust. I choose to trust that the creative intelligence knows what it's doing, that the creative intelligence that gave birth to the galaxies and gave birth to the planetary systems and gave birth to life on this planet, and so brought self awareness into the life on this planet, it knows what it's doing. I choose to trust that it believes that we are ready to make this transition, and that's why it has allowed it, or it supported its emergence. How I live with these things? Well, it's not always been easy. I mean, integrating integrating individual sessions has always been easy because I I followed a strict therapeutic protocol which maximizes the procedure of clear contact and clean integration. And I can't emphasize this enough if you go into psychedelics and you're in a helter shelter environment and you're kind of, you know, at a concert, or you're doing the set, and the other you don't necessarily have clean contact, and therefore integration can be complicated, but if you have clean contact and and careful attention to integration, Recording your experiences, remembering your experiences, pondering your experiences, giving voice to them, giving poetry to them, giving artistic representation of them. You can hold on to more and more your experiences. However, I found that I went so deep on my. Particular journey I went deeper than I think was probably wise for me to go. And what became challenging was not to manage the pain part of the experiences. What became challenging, in the end, was managing the ecstasy. It took me so deeply into the divine bliss and into the ecstatic nature of transcendent reality. That when I stopped my sessions, the physical world just began to lose its appeal. It began to lose its luster. It could not compare to the intensity of that Rapture. Now I know that there are great spiritual beings, and they have always been my mentors, but there are great beings who can live consciously in the physical world and in this great transcendent bliss at the same time, and all honor to the great ones. But in my personal case, I went deeper than I was able to sustain the I was able to remember them. I was able to record them and hold them in my memories, but I wasn't able to live in them. 24/7, and that made living challenging, and I spent literally decades after I stopped my sessions, actively working to integrate those sessions into my daily life. And writing LSD in the mind of the universe and going public as a psychedelic professor was actually part of my integration process, because one of the burdens of doing this work was the secrecy I had to, had to use, and this secrecy that allowed me to do the work also made it difficult for me to integrate that work, because I'm a yacker, I'm a talker. I love to learn and share what I learned. And here I as a philosopher, I was cultivating these very, very profound experiences, but I wasn't allowed to talk about them. I couldn't bring them to my students. I could not bring them to my colleagues at the University. And so beginning to sort of talk about them, to systematically integrate them into into some rhyme and reason in dark night, early dawn, and then in LSD, in the mind of the universe, has been one of the ways in which I have stabilized them and integrated them and made my peace with them, because with that book, I have become in the outside world, what I was in my inner work, and in that there is great peace, and beyond that, it's an ongoing process. I don't think I will complete integrating this work in this lifetime. I think what integration means changes as the experiences go deeper, what integration means when you're working at the personal unconscious, or even the collective unconscious, it's different than when you're going into radically trans, temporal, trans, spatial states of consciousness. So that right now, I don't think we really even understand fully what entering into these states of consciousness is doing to us. We are kind of our early enthusiasm for our ability to enter into these states, we haven't quite caught up with ourselves in that way. So we have a lot of work to do in the area of integration, and in that context, I would mention a book called psychedelics and psychotherapy, edited by Maria Papa Spira and Tim Reed, which is an excellent book on specifically addressing the question of integration. And I have an article in the book.

Chris Bache  1:24:00  
What was the name of that book,

Chris Bache  1:24:02  
psychotherapy, psychedelics and psychotherapy.

Chris Bache  1:24:08  
And so thank you for that. And do you find just one last question, do you find, you know when the the ego? Do you? Do you find yourself really being more aware of what your state is and each moment and choosing? Or is it beyond that?

Chris Bache  1:24:33  
Again, I want to go back to what I showed in the very the early slide, the difference between therapeutic healing, spiritual awakening and cosmic logical exploration. Your question is basically asking, how do these experiences affect my spiritual condition, my my psycho spiritual condition, my spiritual state, if I were seeking spiritual. Awakening I would do, have done a completely different protocol. I think working with low doses would be the approach that you would want to use if you were really seeking what the classic state of enlightenment or you have to kind of work with where the ego lives in the world to realize that kind of abiding transparency, where you can enter into a kind of transparency where you relax into the present and relax into the infinity of eternity now, and relax into the oneness that holds all things in existence. Cosmic logical exploration is a different agenda, and so my whatever I whatever I can integrate from those cosmic logical experiences, what I can and cannot integrate does not at the Spiritual Awakening level, does not really impact the truth that emerged as in the Cosmic, logical adventure. As a philosopher, I wanted to understand how the universe worked and the experiences that the universe gave me as I pursued those that question are not experiences that I can stabilize and integrate. 24/7, some of them may be, but many of them I can't. So I do spirit. I was doing spiritual practice meditation through all of my work through all the years, and continue to do so. And one of the ways I do spiritual practice today is to cultivate the conscious recall of my memories, not to try to get stuck, not to be stuck in my past, but because my memories are my deepest experience of the universe, and by cultivating that conscious recall of those experiences, it allows me to enter into a state of transparency where I enter into something approximating a version of that intimacy, again, beautiful. It's it's not an abiding 24/7 thing for me. It comes and goes. It's a daily practice thing.

Chris Bache  1:27:36  
Thank you so much.

Unknown Speaker  1:27:39  
Jonah, you have your hand up again.

Jonai  1:27:43  
Yes, you can hear me. Okay. That kind of leads into my question or comment when you say, cultivating the conscious recall of your experiences. Does this include past life? Does this include everything I mean, past life, this life, whatever happens to be, come into your mind when you're doing that well.

Chris Bache  1:28:08  
In my psychedelic work, I did encounter some former lives. I also have encountered former lives. In my hep meal therapy work that I did for three years. So but here I'm specifically focusing on my psychedelic work. And, you know, it's it's interesting. I don't really focus very much on integrating my former lives. I think I somehow have done enough house cleaning that they are kind of okay. They're kind of comfortably tucked away. It's more the cosmic logical the memory of cosmic logical access that I cultivate,

Chris Bache  1:28:54  
I what I am,

Chris Bache  1:28:56  
is kind of strange, because you know when, when you look at people who have deep spiritual experiences, usually they have them in the context of a meditation tradition or contemplative tradition, and they can often hold on to the experiences that they've tapped into, sometimes, not always, but often, this approach is different, and it's why I emphasize as a methodology chapter in the book. This is the path of temporary immersion. It's not the path of abiding presence. It's a path of temporary immersion. You have to come to terms with the temporariness of the conditions that you have entered and use those hours in order to affect a long term, abiding change in the condition of your of your psyche, but you and you, just because a person may have had an extra, ordinarily powerful or beautiful experience or cosmic experience, doesn't mean. That they have necessarily become a beautiful or powerful or cosmic being. A lot of people made that mistake in the early days. We've learned from that we have to constantly be remembering these are temporary experiences. What's important is what we can do the day after our session.

Jonai  1:30:20  
Right? Right? Everything is an opportunity, and it's there to learn in some way. As the way I look at it, in 1998 I was just jumping into the nine gates Mystery School, which you're familiar with, I'm sure. And then it all went from there. I had done some preliminary work to that, to get ready to do that. And then, but, but I wanted to bring up was reincarnation, which was kind of, it's kind of, and the new trajectory that you mentioned in terms of reincarnation, you said all of the last all I wrote down all of past lives fused into one, and it's kind of, and I've done a lot of past life stuff. I mean, from there I went through into esthetic studies and and experiential training in ancient archetypal techniques, ancient techniques, and all that kind of wisdom techniques and all that kind of thing. And I did, I did a lot of past life. It wasn't it was because it's karmic issues, taking an event and going back, and then there was a forgiveness process at the end of that. And it's it changes the energy of it, and in changing the energy of that past life experience, so to speak, it's a story. It makes a tremendous difference, because that energy is no longer affecting us. I mean, it changes, you know, the emotional and everything and so and I didn't. I did quite a bit of that for myself. I also helped other people do it. But so it is. It's accepting whatever has happened in the past. And if you need, if something is up and you need to forgive it, fine, and you go from there. But then you're also saying, in this lifetime, all of that is also a part of it, and in the future, the future, and whatever is. And so you're expanding. And another thing as I listen to you talk and think about I'm an avid reader, and I haven't, I kind of shut down on that for a while, but, but I'm back into it now, because I'm trying to update you know myself, and so I can learn from reading your book, from hearing you talk. I can, I can somehow not exactly relate to any kind of a way. I can you went through all of the psychedelic part of getting there, but I I feel an understanding of what you're saying, yes, and so I sort of feel like I've always been a person who, I likes to learn from other people's experiences, right? Because it takes so much less time than me trying to go through all those experiences. I mean, you went through how many years of this, and here's where you are, and now you are sharing this with everybody. So we have a place to start, yeah, and we can go from there, yeah. And that's what I'm counting on. I started counting backwards on birthdays when I from 60. I had read something about 120 years our bodies should be able to last. So I thought, okay, 60 years old if I stop counting backwards and don't get into this senior thing of aging and dying and everything and go backwards. And somebody said, Well, what if you get to zero? And I said, Well, I'll just hang out there for however long it takes. And so that's another I mean, that's just not 100 that's 120 and who knows, you know. And with the with the current, with our soft technology, as, as Greg Braden calls it, all of that, that technology we have in within us,

Unknown Speaker  1:34:13  
to to

Jonai  1:34:17  
to repair and reflect, refraction and rejuvenate and everything. You know, I'm really focusing on that that's real. So, yeah, okay,

Speaker 1  1:34:29  
thank you. Johnny, so Jean, do you did you have another question? I just

Jean Fox  1:34:33  
had one quick question, if someone were want to do, do you recommend, Chris, if you're want to do your own journeying, guided, or self guided. So I feel like I've done some of my own and it's yeah, sometimes it can be scary by yourself absolutely so go ahead.

Chris Bache  1:34:54  
I really recommend if you're going to work with psychedelics, that you work with somebody. Who really knows the landscape, who knows the territory? And now I don't. I have a particular glitch around guided experiences, because I don't the role of a sitter is, to me, is not to guide a person, but simply to help keep you safe and focused while you do your inner work the universe guides you. Sit here's role is to keep you safe, keep you protected, and help keep you focused. And I if you're going to amplify consciousness, I think it's really important to work with somebody who is has therapeutic skills and has knowledge of this territory, and just to loop back just a little bit, psychedelics here are not the issue, not the primary issue. In fact, the name of this book, LSD, in the mind of the universe, was given by the publisher. That's not what I call the book. I call the book is diamonds from heaven because it's a story of initiation. Psychedelics are secondary. You can enter into these states through any number of different spiritual technologies, spiritual techniques and the visions that I've shared with you today are they're not unique to psychedelics. They they have surfaced in spiritual traditions, in channeling traditions, in indigenous traditions, psychedelics is simply another technology for accessing these deep states of awareness, right? So, and I would encourage you, please, anybody, don't do what I do did, and please be careful if you're going to work with psychedelics, be very careful, very conscientious, because when you open these doors, you can get in over your head. And there are people who open these doors and walk away traumatized and scarred for years. Okay, so I want to be very careful.

Jean Fox  1:37:01  
There's so many, there's, you know, a psychotherapist. Then there's lot of different groups, yeah, but it's hard to discern. It's very kind of recommendations of how to find your, you know, even trusted friend.

Chris Bache  1:37:19  
Yeah, things are changing, of course, as it was mentioned earlier. You know, mushrooms are becoming legal in various places. Hundreds and 1000s of people are being certified as past as psychedelic therapists. The future is opening up in ways we could never have anticipated 15 years ago. Thank you. Michael Pollan, you know, and all of those, we're entering a new and exciting era, but we're still in a transition, because it's still, you know, it's still in the gray zone.

Speaker 1  1:37:52  
So thank you. So we're running out of time, but I'm going to have two more questions, Ron. I'm me.

Chris Bache  1:38:03  
So I really appreciate that last question and your answer, Chris, I think this is extremely important in this topic. And I again, I had said before that I speak from a different type of experience than you had. You were doing science. You were tracking things very carefully. When I talked about that, I'd had some experience with micro dosing before it was called that. That was a social thing, but I will say that my last session and I did have a few larger dose sessions that I did my very last session, I think satisfied me, because I did a solitary session, and I was in nature, and I remember the emotional place that it took me was very strong and very poignant. I was. I had tears of both what I now know are both joy and grief. Because I was, I was really appreciating the oneness of the magnificent beauty of all of creation around me, and it's amazing complexities. And at the same time, I was having grief, because I was aware of what we're doing to our world and who we are as humans and all of our failings now at the moment, because I didn't have a sitter and I didn't have any science or good counsel, someone keeping me safe and keeping me on track with my experience to make it a healing experience or a therapeutic experience. Years, I thought I was having a bummer, because I was so emotional, I didn't know how to cope with that at the time, and only now in in looking back, you know, 50 years ago, no 40 years ago, that, and having this topic become more public, and being able to read and and listen to people like you speak about it, I could say that I've probably spent my whole life integrating that, you know, and so it's it's been okay, but I want to really chime in, in a very simple street wise guy sort of way to say it. This is not to be done lightly, and even even with micro dosing, without, without having someone be a sitter and a guide and and doing that, I would really, I would really caution it, and then, especially with the larger doses, I so appreciate how you went into detail about your answer to that last question from, I'm sorry I forgot your name is a jean. So thank you, Chris, thank you so much for all of this. Thank you. It's, I've, I've really appreciated it very much.

Unknown Speaker  1:41:29  
Thank you. Thank you,

Unknown Speaker  1:41:31  
Georgina. You get the last question.

Georgena Eggleston  1:41:38  
It's too Yeah, what is really, really short is LSD country, indicated for those people with a diagnosis of traumatic brain injury.

Chris Bache  1:41:51  
That is a question that I'm not competent to ask. It should really be answered by clinical professional. I would imagine it would depend upon the nature of the of the injury. But really, let me, I won't, let's yield that to the people

Chris Bache  1:42:09  
who should answer.

Georgena Eggleston  1:42:11  
So the other question is, is you gave the quote by the British professional at the beginning, I got, certainly the sense of lack, limitation and fear. And as we've been talking about the precipice and what we're going into, it sounds like those are, the consciousness, lack, limitation, fear, here we are. How can, how from your experience, what? What do you say to my interpretation of that, for all of us going into this crisis?

Chris Bache  1:42:52  
Yeah, you know, some people said, have said, If we focus too much on the negative, we actually will bring about that negative. We will think it will bring it into existence. And I think I understand that, and I do understand self generating realities and so on so forth. But I don't think that's the primary danger. Now, the primary danger is not facing those realities, and that if we don't face those realities, we can't mobilize to address them. If we don't really understand and face in a cold, sober fashion how overextended the we are with this planet, we will never be able to bring about a change, a fundamental change, of our individual and our social way of living on the planet. So to me, I would rather sit with people who are facing that, who are engaging the grief of what we have done to the species on this planet and to the planet itself, to work with that issue and take that all the way down to a resolution, and then move forward and through it. And there are, of course, Joanna Macy people who are doing this type of work. I think a great deal of grief work is needed as we confront the damage that we've done, but then we move into, okay, let's get on top of this. Let's move forward. Let's make these changes that are necessary.

Georgena Eggleston  1:44:30  
Thank you.

Speaker 1  1:44:33  
Okay, well, thank you so much. I'm going to put it back on the gallery view. So thank you so much, Chris, this is amazing and inspiring and really powerful. Thank you for your years of work, for all of us, all of humanity, for Austin to have this in insight into what. Were about, and I'm going to read your book, both of your books. Which one would you recommend I read first?

Chris Bache  1:45:09  
Oh, I always recommend that people start. First of all, you can read LSD in the mind of the universe. It's it's a much simpler book to read than dark night early dawn. It does not require dark matter at dawn, dark naturally, Dawn is pretty academic, muscled, but LSD in the mind of the universe, I wrote that to be accessible to a wide range of people. But personally, I find, if you don't know the literature on reincarnation, I often think it's best to start with the life cycles, which is my book on reincarnation, because reincarnation is fundamental to what emerges in LSD, in the mind of the universe.

Speaker 1  1:45:48  
Okay, thank you so. Thank you everyone for joining and for your comments and questions and thanks again, Chris, this is wonderful. I think we might have to have you back to talk about your book later on. So thank you so much again, and thanks everybody, and we'll see you next time. Thanks so much Dottie and Heather. Much love Yes, and thank you again, Heather for bringing us. Chris,

Chris Bache  1:46:15  
thank you so much.

Speaker 1  1:46:17  
Bye, everyone. Thank you. Thank you so much. Bye.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
