Andrew Holecek  0:00  
So welcome everybody to our ongoing edge of mind podcast, where I have the great honor and delight to spend a little bit more time with this remarkable thinker, psychonaut, explorer of the mind and heart, Christopher Bache, and really continue to unpack unfold some of the many aspects of his remarkable journey that we introduced in round one of my conversation. And so I will reiterate a very brief bio of Chris, and then we're just going to jump right in and slowly venture into hopefully some rich, deep waters. So Christopher Bache is a professor emeritus in the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at Youngstown State University, where he taught for 33 years, fellow at the Institute of Noetic Sciences. He was also adjunct faculty at the California Institute of integral studies and on the advisory board for Grof Transpersonal training and the Grof Foundation, an award winning teacher international speaker who's the author of three books and lives in Portland. You're still in Portland, right?

Chris Bache  1:09  
Actually, we're in Weaverville, North Carolina now. Just Oh, okay,

Andrew Holecek  1:13  
well, I'm glad I asked Yeah, yeah. So Chris, thank you again for for taking time to return and unfold with me some of the remarkable implications of your journey. So at the outset, deep of gratitude for you.

Chris Bache  1:27  
It's a pleasure to be with you today. Andrew, thank you for the invitation.

Andrew Holecek  1:31  
Yeah, really, I deeply appreciate it. And so what I thought what we could explore is I was re reading some of the material, especially the latter chapters in your journey. LSD, in the mind, in the universe, that's mostly what we're going to be unfolding, but also conjoined with the living classroom, because there's obviously some wonderful interconnectivity between those narratives that will be woven into this. But I thought what we could we could introduce is a narrative, of a topic that's very near and dear to my heart right now, so much so that I'm writing one book on it, and probably two. And I think we pinged on this just a wee bit in our first session, but I want to explore it in a little bit more detail now, because to me, I think using your languaging it this this narrative of openness and contraction is really, I've, I've come to see it as kind of the combustion cycle of the spiritual path. And so I thought we could start with that narrative as a way to, perhaps, like a, like a fractal, reiterate the entirety of your journey within the session itself. In other words, start a little bit more with this narrative and maybe continue to expand, to open into deeper and deeper dimensions. As in fact, your journey, both during the 20 years and after, took you through as a way to really talk, both in a kind of philosophical and also. And the reason I love these terms somatic sense, I love the notion of openness and contraction, because these are things we can feel. I mean, they're not just cerebral, intellectual story lines. These are things that we can feel in our body, mind matrix. And so I would like to dive into that with you as we perhaps set our direction towards what I consider to be the climax of your book, The diamond Luminosity. But because that light is so bright, that space is so open, that we perhaps can dilate the aperture of our awareness, our hearts and minds a little bit more slowly and start by by sending a question in your direction about how this, your journey, could be articulated in this expression, this kind of pulsation. Or the Hindus talk about it beautifully, and the tradition of spanda, the doctrine of vibration, which I'm starting to see now, and I'll share some of my own experiences and insights of openness, contraction, openness and then contraction. So maybe we could start there and then that, I think will lend us gradually into wider and wider and perhaps greater degrees of openness.

Chris Bache  4:17  
Okay, you bet that's good place to start. So in my understanding, in my experience, psychedelics, in general and in particular, LSD, which was my primary medicine in this journey, is an amplifier of consciousness. And so When consciousness is amplified, signals which are quiet, get large, get loud, and you have a sensation of your becoming aware of more and more how you meet. That increase of awareness, how you engage what emerges is seminal in the process. If you engage the shadow consciously, it. You confront those things which keep you habitually contracted and small. You engage those fears, or whatever it is, you take them to their source, to the root. They resolve themselves, and when they resolve themselves, your consciousness is free to open into more spacious places. Every time you let go of something which is holding your consciousness in a fixed pattern or holding it small, particularly initially your your time space identity, your historical egoic identity that tells us who we are. But if you can let go of that you discover that there are these dimensions beyond your time, space identity, which are even more truly, really what you are. And if you keep this going, you go through multiple layers of consciousness. There's a point where you have to let go, surrender or die, not only to your individual identity, but to your identity as a human being. Per se, there is a deeper sense of humanity that defines that holds the limits of your knowing, and there's a going even deeper. There's a sense of time, space, identity. You let go of your entire existence, including all your reincarnational experiences of time space as a framework for holding experience. And your experience flows beyond time and space, and this is an entirely natural process, I think thought of as a broader conjecture. My understanding of what happens inside a psychedelic session is that it basically accelerates and intensifies what is taking place in nature all the time. So when we are born, our consciousness contracts into our an individual, egoic time, space, identity. When we die, we expand. There's a sense of expanding back into the souls, back back into deeper spiritual awareness. When we're born, we contract. When we die, we expand. And so what happens in a session? It simply accelerates and intensifies this natural process which is taking place in history over a longer period. So what it allows you to do is to accelerate that process and to start by burning off more karma than one might get around to otherwise, and that's the same thing that happens in meditation, of course, too. Same dynamic. And it's

Andrew Holecek  7:47  
interesting, isn't it? My favorite running definition of meditation these days is habituation to openness, and I find it there's so many implications of that, Chris, because I mean parenthetically, the Buddha we know etymologically, usually translated as the awakened one. But I've also heard renderings as the opened one. And so the reason I find this beautiful, for a number of reasons, is encountered distinction. We're the contracted ones. And so by bringing this, the reason I think this is so important is because by bringing this process, this phenomenology, into the light of our conscious awareness, we can better sensitize ourselves to it in a more somatic sense. It's against something. This is something we can feel. This is not just a cerebral, intellectual thing. We can feel this process of contraction and openness within our very Soma. And for me, what I'm curious Chris is two things. One, how early in your journey did this become apparent to you? I mean, how I can't remember all your sessions with great specificity, but where did this narrative become identifiable for you? How did it help you as you continue to go further, and then parenthetically, just so I don't forget this as well. The other thing I find around this narrative that's so helpful that you were suggesting at the outset is that we're practicing this, whether we know it or not, where we are, either on the path of practicing habituation to openness, or if we don't know it, and most of us don't, by default, we're practicing contraction every time we capitulate to grasping to beliefs, to a sense of, I mean, virtually everywhere that is our default contraction. And so again, I know I'm throwing a couple things out there, but I think this is so foundational for me that after decades, when I look back, it's like, oh my gosh, I can really look with a new sense of understanding from this altitude, wow. My whole journey has been this kind of pulsation, opening, expanding, how much of that can I deal then metabolizing, contracting, so little bit around that, little bit more on that.

Chris Bache  10:00  
Sure it actually started in the very first session. My very first session, I hit an experience where I could not remember anything about myself. I could not remember who I was, what I was, I couldn't remember what I did for a living. I could not remember whether I was a man or a woman, I was absolutely jammed. And I looked in 1000 mirrors. I couldn't find any piece of individual, egoic identity, and it was, of course, very jarring, frightening in the beginning, and then later in the session, my sense of identity returned. But it that experience was really important, because it told me, at first, it gave me an insight into the dynamic. It shook me up, and it showed me a certain measure of the true cost, you know, because I had read about ego death, and I thought, Oh, good, let's do it, and I hadn't appreciated, this is a true death. This is a loss of your identity. And it basically taught me to The Art of Letting Go and the art of surrender, because if you can't control your self identity, identity, and that's about as basic as it gets. And so later, when the ante kept increasing, I knew that the key to navigating whatever was coming was to surrender, let it go and it it stopped me from trying to hold on to something familiar, hold on something I could identify with. And that just then, that just went on. It escalated from there, about two and a half years later, when my individual, egoic identity was turned inside out and just crushed, I went through a collapse of that smaller state, and they rebirth into a deeper state, and then later through after the ocean of suffering, After spending two years in that you know, surrounded by the historical suffering of humanity and these unfinished memories, painful memories, there was a death process which then catapulted me into a deeper level of reality, beyond the collective unconscious, into archetypal consciousness. And this pattern just kept repeating itself so but it started very early on, and then, then it's just the texture of the openness differs, the context differs, the purity of it differs. There's a lot of light, of course, engaging fields of light, but I found that light itself also has gradients, their various kind of levels of purity of light, levels of clarity of light. And so the actual content of openness is it changes in the work. But the phenomenon that of opening into something larger, something deeper. Now I want to caution this little bit qualify it the sensation and the certain stages of work and what I would call the psychic and subtle levels of consciousness. The sensation often is of getting larger. And I think this is characteristic of subtle level reality, subtle level of states of consciousness, and then later, much later, in the journey, this experience was just reversed. That is, I was experiencing huge fields of light, contracting into the present and just exploding me into that, into some different state of consciousness. But everything was contracting, contracting. So I began to realize that the whole subject, I even began to wonder whether we had Miss identified the nature of psych of psychedelics by calling them mind openers. Yeah, I understand. But at another level, they are Mind Mind contractors, where you're contracting deeper and deeper and deeper into the present, present, present, present, until you drop into a very different experience of that present. So openness, we just want to be careful to recognize that there's a there are different modalities.

Andrew Holecek  14:26  
It's a multi isn't it, Chris, it's a multivalent term, right? It has, it has different iterations and context. And several things come to mind here. That contraction into the present moment is very interesting in the in the languaging that I'm familiar with, and you may be familiar with this too. Pamasambhava talked about it as the fourth moment, which one can only actually access through the conduit of the present moment. So what an interesting kind of juxtaposition and almost clash of traditional approaches where I don't want. Level by contracting in the healthy sense. And again, this is, I think, super important, because in and of itself, contraction is utterly non problematic. We couldn't operate in the world without that aspect of that pulsation. And so we tend to clamor towards openness as that somehow being the ultimate spiritual thing. I think provisionally, there's some truth to that. But if we can't merge that openness with our contraction, then contraction becomes the bad boy, the bad girl. And we look at it in a kind of a limited way, but in my experience, in Padmasambhava, use this language of the fourth moment you contract, you condense into the portal, the it becomes the portico, into the timeless beyond, where you come to the present moment, and then that blows up, so to speak, into the fourth moment, which Transcendence, even the present moment itself. And I think that's helpful, because we're going to start to tread into waters where languages will because it's dualistic and nature becomes problematic. And as you know, in the Buddhist tradition, one has to be, or is invited to be, incredibly articulate precise, in order to realize when we use this term exactly, how are we using it in what context. And so I think therefore, it seems like, Well, wait a second, isn't the whole thing about opening? Well, yes, but it's also honoring the process of contraction, and how that can lead to this.

Chris Bache  16:20  
Yeah, you know, you're mentioning Padma Samba. It gives me an opportunity to, once again, emphasize the point that there are correlations, and I'm grateful for the correlations between my experiences and those recorded by the Great Beings. The Padma Samba was of the world, the great contemplatives. But this path that I was on is not that contemplative path. It's a path of temporary immersion. So when I'm describing things, it always has to be understood that this is a temporary experience, which then to unpack the spiritual potential of that temporary experience. You know, we can have that conversation, but it's, it's not the same as when you come into these experiences using what you might think of as the slow bake method of sustained contemplation, you know. So I just always want to be careful to keep apples and oranges separate, and because so many people good point, they think, Oh, I've had a tremendous revelatory enlightenment experience. And that's, you know, it says, well, good for you, but, but that's, it's, that's a temporary experience

Andrew Holecek  17:36  
that is unbelievably important. I mean, how does the saying go? An enlightened experience does not make one an enlightened being. I mean, that's, as you know, that's a difference in Tibet language, in between experience and realization by definition. Yeah, experience always has a beginning and an end, yeah. And in order to mature that, and that's very interesting, because that that's a large part of the path where I think a lot of people really get tripped up. I speak from my own experience, you have these tremendous metanoias, these openings. You think you're enlightened. And then what do you do? You grasp after that, and you just replace a chain made of lead with one made of gold. And so yeah, therefore understanding that there's, there's the path, quality of of continuing that. And so just to reinstate a couple things when you're talking about deeper states, just to make sure I'm understanding you, Chris, it seems to me that you're also saying a deeper state is, is somewhat synonymous with, with a more open state that is, you're waking in, you're also expanding and then, and then, perhaps, as you pointed out, that that it then points or directs to us how it is that we're constructing this self sense, moment to moment. This is the other thing I think, that is incredibly important, that we tend and I'm speaking from like confessional thing, we tend to think that the ego structure, the self sense, is this monolithic, reified entity. And this is where we can learn a lot from our scientific brothers and sisters in science, physics and neuroscience, it's a process. It's not a product. The self sense is constantly being constructed. And therefore, when you go through this type of de construction, or demolition derby, by immediate implication, you can see through the process of demolition, the process of construction, and therefore, how we are responsible for the way we contract and we do so largely for purposes of protection, fear and the like. But is that? Is that a fair representation of what you discovered?

Chris Bache  19:32  
It is, it's, it's a fair representation, and it's a way, it's a description which fits better, in some ways, the early stages of the work, where you are still kind of working at insights which help you understand your individual way of being in the world. And then, you know, I describe my work fundamentally. Play as a work in cosmological exploration, where not only do you leave your individual ego behind, you know, at least temporarily and you leave, but you leave deeper and deeper levels behind, at least in my experience, and are given the opportunity to explore how the universe constructs its reality, how archetypal reality structures time and space reality, how oneness manifests in the diversity of all physical of all life forms, of all atomic, Nuclear, quantum life forms, how the pure void of emptiness is that mysterious, fertile essence which is giving birth to time and space. I mean the vast, you know, the vastness of time and space, moment by moment, minute by minute. So it is, you know, very useful to understand your personal way of contracting, the personal way of you, know, sustaining your smallness. But for me, I mean, not trained as a philosopher, I wanted to understand the larger spectrum of reality, and so the invitation that that was given to me was just to explore how time and space is made. And I wish, I mean, I so often wish I had a PhD in physics and astrophysics. I mean, I could have understood so much more of what I was being shown. But you know, always, the universe can only communicate to you successfully, that which you have the capacity to understand.

Andrew Holecek  21:45  
Yes, exactly. Oh, that's what a fantastic statement, Chris. Because to me, it's like, and this is what you suggest towards the end of your book, when you were wrestling, struggling, working with this process of integration, how, in a very real way, you using this particular mechanism, dis integrated, opened, open, open, open. And then And then, really, in my language, in here, using frameworks that we're both familiar with, that this notion of in the Indic Traditions, this pedagogical approach, I think we might have hit it last session of of hearing, contemplating, meditating, my language and ingest, digest, metabolize, and what, the way I read your experience, that I think is really worth talking about, is that you you open to such an extent, and I can speak a little bit from my own experience, that then the issue became one of digestion and metabolism. And the reason I mentioned this, that I think has tremendous applicability, is that sometimes, when we look at things like psychosis, and you were treading sometimes that thin membrane between Transcendence in psychosis, the loss of self sense, that the the issue of integration, bringing that in in a certain way, and pardon my kind of play on languaging here is that psychosis can be, in fact, a type of eating disorder that you actually open to such an extent that then you actually don't have the capacity, you don't have the infrastructure, the wherewithal to digest and metabolize. And then, instead of opening body mind. You blow body mind, and sense of reference is then completely so decimated that that is one way to perhaps talk about the whole psychotic aspect and the risk, perhaps some of the perils of doing this type of deep diving.

Chris Bache  23:34  
I understand and you're certainly right that doing this type of work does carry certain risks and has to be approached cautiously and with careful support structures in place and careful self monitoring and so on so forth. I don't think, and I do understand the relationship between psychosis and Transcendence, and I think it was at Huston Smith who said a mystic is someone who learns how to swim in the waters, in the vast waters, and a psychotic drown.

Andrew Holecek  24:07  
That is like actually, Lang, already Lang, yeah,

Chris Bache  24:12  
in my case, I understand the psychotic looking qualities of loss of self that, but I would not ever I would not describe my experiences walking that particular edge. And if I had gotten into a situation where I felt I was at that edge, I would have changed course. I would have done something differently. My experience was that by working in a very carefully clinical type, modality and opening systematically. The universe really opened me systematically, in a way beyond my calculation. But it opened me very, very carefully, and so it peeled me carefully, and it broke me open, layer by layer by layer, if it had. Pulted me, you know, beyond, beyond beyond so quickly, then I could have had problems integration. But in my experience, I always opened and I always congealed comfortably and carefully. And if I had not congealed comfortably and carefully, then I would have been given pause, because that's a symptom of something really going wrong. So it's not the depth of loss of self which marks the psychotic episode. I think it also has to do with a kind of confusion, but I absolutely agree you have to walk these waters very carefully. I seem to have a kind of a natural constitution. I mean, you know, I started this work. I never came from any traumatized background, just the ordinary, you know, pains of growing up and whatnot. But I had fundamentally, a core, strong self, and I also had a capacity, it's in my natal astrological natal chart, a capacity to open and an interest in opening up into the vast expanse of consciousness and to contract back. So if you don't have that natural capacity, or if you're bringing in disruptive trauma or other qualities in your person, then very much this work may not be for you. You know, it's a

Andrew Holecek  26:30  
little bit like Jack Engler famously said, and I think it's appropriate statement, you have to be someone before you can be no one. That's right there. I think that cannot be overstated, that there the ego itself, fundamentally, is non problematic. It's a developmental stage. It's just a form of Arrested Development. And so if you don't have that stable self sense, then, in fact, then instead of dis differentiating, you dissociate. And then that's where it becomes somewhat problematic. Then the ability to find that identity, to find some refuge, becomes really somewhat disconcerting. But Chris, towards the end of your book, I want to come back to this just a little bit, because my understanding of what you're sharing towards the end, like what, what dictated stopping after the 73rd journey was, and I found this one of the most compelling, pardon the pun, electrifying parts of your book. Where it was, it was as if your body, mind matrix, had become so open. And we talked about this last time. This is so important. This kind of tantric work, body is as important as mine. When you're opening your mind, you are opening your body. And as you open your body, even the classic inner yogic sense, all these energies, what they talk about is the winds come through. And if those winds aren't written properly, they can throw you and so if I understand what you said towards the end, in a certain way, your system was running too hot. You there was so much energy, so much release that, again, this is this returns us to this digestion, metabolism component. It was like my cup runneth over. I have, I have enough experience here to spend the rest of this life, or other lives now, digesting this feast. Yeah, and so isn't, isn't that a fair way to recapitulate what you said at the end, that you stopped the feast because there was just too much to eat, so to speak.

Chris Bache  28:18  
I think, I think that's a fair description. In my case, I don't, I think it's not because I didn't ride the wind successfully. I think I rode the wind successfully, but I rode the winds too long in the sense. I mean, they were just, they would stretch me out so so wide and so deep. And I think this is, you know, in the early stages of psychedelic use, both individually, and I think culturally, we get excited by having being able to have contact with the transcendent dimensions. And that's so liberating. And it's so intellectually, you know, opening to us to the intelligence that lives in the universe, that is the universe,

Unknown Speaker  29:05  
but

Chris Bache  29:07  
our our tradition is our theological and even our contemplative traditions, I think, tend to accept at the very highest levels, tend to underestimate the dimensions of the Divine, or underestimate the dimensions of the Universe, so that leads us to underestimate how vast the world is that we can open into. And psychedelics do give us the capacity, even when they are used well, and I hope I use them skillfully and responsibly, but even when I did that, it basically opened me so deeply into such intimacy with the universe, transcending time, transcending space, and even though I contracted back, okay, the memory or the beauty and. Memory of the communion was just so dear and so intense that I could not, I could not take return and coming back. I just couldn't do it anymore.

Andrew Holecek  30:15  
Yeah, you couldn't. You couldn't go to the train station and leave your lover one more time,

Chris Bache  30:19  
right? Yeah, yeah. And I just, just had to stay here and let her come to me in whatever form was possible by me not going into a non ordinary state, but staying here and letting and just digesting like you say, I picked up a lifetime and more of experiences to digest.

Andrew Holecek  30:43  
So let me ask you this, and I hope it's okay if we go into, I mean, the book itself is so intimate, it's so personal, that I don't think I'm violating any borders with you. But if I go into areas where it's like, yeah, I don't want to go there, you will not offend me. But what you said at the end so much was the end of the book. I was really moved by this, because in a certain way, when I look back over my own life, Chris, it became more articulate over the last couple of years. My entire life has been is a way learning how to prepare to die. I mean, I wrote a book by the very title, and in the most elegant way, that journey has actually brought me more fully into life than I could have imagined. So my passion for death is that has actually brought me more fully into life than I could have possibly imagined. And so I have a deep, deep fascination, interest in death, dying, thanatology. To me, really, the whole spiritual path is death in slow motion, opening, titrating, opening on our terms. But will you share at the end? I thought was so beautiful, just to expand we said here that I in a certain way I couldn't wait to die, that I couldn't wait to return to my beloved. But let me, let me ask you this, how do you think, why? What do you expect will happen, and why do you think somehow you'll be more prepared for her ultimate embrace with a dissolution of your body at the moment of death than you are now. I mean, are you perhaps again? I don't know. Kidding yourself is very open question. What is the intuition or the felt scent that says I can't wait to dissolve into the embrace of the beloved at the moment of death? And then why? Why do you think you'll be able to handle that any differently than you can handle it now,

Chris Bache  32:24  
I don't think I would handle it differently at the moment of my final death, whenever that takes place, then I could handle it now. I think if I were to die right now, the training that I went through in my psychedelic work, and it is just as you say, it is a training to die, and that training actually becomes a training in how to live. Because, you know, there's like two realities in the world. There's the domain of light, I think of it as pure light, and then there's the green reality, which is manifest physical world, which is the world of, you know, the world that we are part of, nirmanakaya. So there's Dharmakaya and nirmanakaya, and they are interpenetrating. They are the same reality experienced in different modalities. And what we experience as death is really just a an intersection of a moment of intersection between these realities. And as you awaken, you don't you awaken into a deeper into the fact of the constant intersection, the constant simultaneity of these realities. So what happens when we die physically and what happens when we die spiritually, are really deeply one in the same in a way, and I feel like in my sessions I went through, I was taken into my own death process multiple times. I can't really count how many times I died, and so I have a sense that I know the pathway well. I read the literature about the Bardo confusions that can distract us and prevent us from returning fully to a Dharmakaya when we die. And I recognize that, and I have, I feel like I've dealt with many of those, and I, I may be wrong, you know, we'll find out, yeah, find out the final exam, right? Yeah, but I have a sense that, to me, death is will be not only joyful as it is for everybody, but easy, because I don't feel a deep clinging to not only my personal identity, but I don't feel a deep clinging to human existence or to time space. Uh so and you're absolutely right, all spiritual practice. And I think of psychedelic practice as I try to do it as a spiritual practice, you know, a session. I call them sessions, not a period of spiritual practice. Yeah, they are preparing you for that moment of death, and if everything goes well, you do get to die before you die. Remember the word those who die before they die do not die when they die. So that what would be lovely if I could experience what I think of as full liberation would be if she came to me while I was still in my body, and I got to live in the death state. Yes, I was alive in the physical state, but it's so

Andrew Holecek  35:46  
beautiful, and this is so important.

Chris Bache  35:50  
This view

Andrew Holecek  35:51  
alone can irrevocably, radically alter our relationship to the end of life and transition. And by the way, we should make a deal with each other. Chris, when I was reading your book, I thought of the same thing, that both the use of the word psychedelic and death. I think these are branding issues. We need to rebrand these terms. So every time I read psychedelic, it was like impressed by this ridiculous condition button to that word. And so I'm talking about playing here, but you should replace every instance of psychedelic with Entheogen. I should replace in my work of death and dying. I'm really going to actively try to do this because death is such a reified ridiculous notion. I'm going to do my best to every time I use that word as mindfulness to speech, replace it with the word transition, because otherwise death seems so final, it's so solid, and it's like this terrible, monolithic thing, yeah? But no, it's not, you know, what did Marie Curie say? Beautifully. He said, nothing in life is to be feared. It is only to be understood, yeah? And so what we're doing here is this tremendous understanding. So I want to talk a little bit about this, because this is so important for us.

Chris Bache  36:59  
Well, let me before we go in the next let me just hope respond to something you said, okay, one of the things that I write about in the book in the diamond Luminosity chapter, is, once you've died so many times and at so many levels of consciousness, the very concept of death loses its meaning because you Learn you cannot die. The form you are can die. Everything about all your understandings and all your history can die, but you cannot die at that point. You know, in that diamond Luminosity chapter, when I made my first transition into the diamond Luminosity, the name of that chapter I gave that is the death state. And the song which I've sung in that chapter, you know, my, my, if you what we would usually call the song of realization, was the death state, you know. And it the death state is the awakened state. It is the it is the reality state.

Andrew Holecek  38:01  
Yeah, you're the very impression. This is exactly the question I was going to ask you, that when you went through these repetitive openings, releases and deaths, it became easier. In fact, you became more familiar with it, right? The very Tibetan word for meditation to become familiar with. So it's only because, again, we don't, we're not we don't understand it. We're not familiar with it. Hence we fear it. And so you die over and over and over. You become more familiar with it, you understand it, you befriend it, and you go, Oh my gosh. This is just this natural state of openness that is only fearful in reference to the ego structure, to the form which we're exclusively identified with, that we're so afraid of letting go of. So just, I want to reinstate this. Yeah, it's just so important. It becomes easier. The more frequently you die in meditation or through these sessions, or whatever, the more familiar you get with it until it becomes like his holiness. Karmapa said at the moment he's transitioned in this beautiful interview, two days before he died, nothing happens. Nothing happens to get to that point to say with utter conviction, nothing happens. Yeah, unbelievable,

Chris Bache  39:19  
yeah, yeah, death becomes your best friend. Truly. It becomes your best friend. In your practice, you're always looking for your best friend. Now I just want to qualify again a little bit, just the unusual scope, though, the hardest strip down that I went through in any of my sessions, the most extreme, you know destruction of was in the 70th session, in the last, what I consider the last vision I was given in among many major visions. And so at one level earlier, and I had gone through so many deaths, and they do. Get easier, and you look forward to them, and you embrace them, and so on and so forth. And yet I have to put that beside this particular phenomena where the transition was not easy. I didn't resist it. I gave into it, but it was really extreme, and that's because my session, or the consciousness guiding my session was taking me into an extremely radical state of consciousness that was deeper into deep time than it had ever taken me before. It was giving me one last, culminating series of teachings that required an unusually large canvas, and so it had nothing to do with personal enlightenment or personal ego death or something like that. So once again, we always have to contextualize all of our observations in terms of the level of consciousness that we're working with but in general, I think you're absolutely right. The more you die, the more comfortable you get with it, but and, and to be able to say, as the Karmapa did nothing, nothing happens, is to be in a cherished, cherished state,

Andrew Holecek  41:17  
isn't it? Yeah. And if we really understand that, again, returning to the narrative, the contraction, openness, narrative, openness narrative, if we truly understand and feel in our in our heart of hearts, that when we die, it's the ultimate grand opening, right, there we go. It's the grand opening. And if we understand that these are little miniature openings, we become more familiar with those in our meditation state. I mean, how much of the path is letting go of identification to thought the body to exclusive identification with form. It is absolutely death in slow motion, and therefore towards the end of life, then we really actually have, like you said, it's a complete reversal of our normal fear. Now we actually have something to look forward to, instead of going into the Bardos looking through the rear view mirror. That's what makes everything so painful. We actually now have something to look forward to is the big unwind. The big unwind, yeah, the final exhalation, the final openness, which is absolutely fundamentally ecstatic. It's this release into the into the blood. And so this is so important, and I love your languaging here of the return to the Beloved. Because if we have this again in a heart of hearts, if we know that we are going to return to the embrace of the Beloved, you're going to return to your lover at the moment to death and be held in this ultimate holding environment. Oh my goodness, does that change our relationship to the end of life? I am going to return to the embrace of the cosmic mother. Wow, these are then you die as a sinner with a smile on your face, instead of kicking and screaming and making a really difficult transition. So this cannot, in my opinion, be overstated, because this will radically change the way we relate to old age sickness. As I look down and this apparatus has served me pretty well for decades, is starting to crumble. Yeah, instead of Oh crap, it's oh wow, yeah. It's like, whatever,

Chris Bache  43:13  
yeah. It's the one wonderful joy and mercy of life that they it can't stop you from dying. You know, it's like, the older you get, every you get one foot closer to joy and ecstasy and the whole attempt to, you know, cryogenics, to not die and to freeze the body, that's just sort of so sad. I mean, it's just so terribly sad. And it's not, you know, yeah, it's such that's why, you know, I taught near death episode research for years in my courses, along with reincarnation research and other things. And over and over and over again when students, when I went with students through this wonderful literature, and they watched how those people's lives were totally changed. Their relationship to death was totally changed by their temporary experience of what's on the other side of death, and having experienced the beloved in their own form of the beloved that had an experience of softening permanently their own fear of death and changing their expectations. So this is, you know, this death research is really, really a powerful psycho spiritual work.

Andrew Holecek  44:29  
I couldn't agree more, the work of Greyson and Eben Alexander and others who come back with these really remarkable stories. And I think this also is worth reinstating that I believe it's like, I've never had an official n de, but I've had what I call meditative and the ease. And to me, it's like you don't have to have these over and over for them to change your life. You just need one. And it's because, and I wonder if this resonates with you, it's because they're so true. There's. So real that it just takes one to completely change the texture of your life. And this is, as you know, they are using these agents now to remove fear of death for people who are just terrified, one session, one session will completely open you to the point where all fear of death is done and over with. That's no small

Chris Bache  45:21  
as you say it. People say, Well, how do you know what you whether what you experienced was real? Maybe it was just a complicated hallucination or self fulfilling prophecy, and it's like, no, you know what reality feels like, and this is more real than the physical real. It is a hyper reality. It's just, it's objectivity is unmistakable, yeah, and you don't have to, you don't can't quibble with it. Don't need to argue with it. Don't need to question it's just, it's obviously true,

Andrew Holecek  45:52  
exactly, and then really, again, come back and come back to the contraction thing. It is, in fact, egos, inability to digest, metabolize that that then contracts against it and fights against it is a type of reducing valve. I love Huxley. What Huxley said, the brain reducing valve that. And on one level, we need it, because it's like you said, we don't have the capacity to be developmentally that open. And so we, on one level, we need this type of reduction in order to survive. But really, I would argue that's what constitutes growth. Is reducing the reducing valve continuing to open until we can actually become this ultimate openness in this and in that sense, become the cosmos itself. And so this ties into what we're talking about last time that. And I love what you said about this, that in order to become, I don't remember your exact terms, but something like, in order to become one with the universe, we first need to become one with the self. And you could say they're the same, right? Can you say a little bit more about that? How that was, yeah, kind of played out in your own experience, because I think again, this is where we go and we die, right? We become nothing simultaneously. We become everything.

Chris Bache  47:08  
Yeah, well, the experience was to become one with all of existence. You know, we would say, to become one with God, to become one with the universe, to become one with one. We can't do that if we're not one within ourselves, if we have unintegrated pieces of shadow or ego fragments or untouchable wounds or bruises. So when you when you move into intimacy with life, life life itself brings these unintegrated pieces to the surface, so you can make your peace with them, and so you can reabsorb them, so you can be become whole and coherent within your own being. Because how could you become one with life if you're not one with yourself. And so it's not, you know, just these things develop synergistically. The deeper your experience of oneness with life, the deeper your experience of oneness with yourself, until they're stopped, until these divisions, just they disappear inside of yourself. And I think one of the wonderful qualities we appreciate about awakened beings is there, is there integrity? Is there oneness, their sense of deep relaxation within themselves, which is a outgrowth of their intimacy with life itself?

Andrew Holecek  48:38  
Yeah, and isn't that? Isn't that fantastic, the way it yet again, this reiterates the process of reiteration itself, that by learning to, in fact, embrace ourselves, and again, talk about practical my tree, loving kindness, learning to, in a Certain Way, unite, befriend every aspect of our usually disenfranchised spectrum of our being, all the parts that we reject that we then throw into the unconscious mind that keeps a large part of the unconscious mind going. And so therefore, to me, Chris, it's like when we understand the divine nature of reality, which includes the divine nature of the the entire spectrum of my being, then what, without this framework, would be considered the shadow elements, the thing, the parts of ourselves that we don't want to embrace, that we that, therefore we spend our lives on a certain very sophisticated avoidance strategy. If we understand through this view, say, Yes, befriend every aspect of your own being. I mean, again, like with death, this radically changes the way we relate to the unwanted, so called aspects of our own spectrum. We're being right here and right now. We learn how to open, open and say yes to whatever takes place, and then that type of integration, I love, this. The interjection of the integrity we feel people then leads to fundamental integration with the so called outside world altogether.

Chris Bache  50:08  
Yeah, and one of the, one of the last pieces, of course, well recognized in the spiritual traditions, is the importance of giving up private enlightenment, you know, because that's just spiritual shadow, so that the more you know, everything you do for others is part of is your awakening, and everything you do for yourself, including trying to become enlightened, it gets in your way.

Andrew Holecek  50:34  
Yeah, yeah, yeah. This and again, this brings the social nexus of the path into play, which I love, what you write about in your book that we tend to think and I think provisionally So, if we look at the term Hinata in its kind of pedagogical approach, there's a lot to be said about start at home, start where you are, clean up with your stuff. But the near, but the near enemy of that is then you become a little bit myopic, little bit near sighted. And for me, I say this with as part of my path. I mean, on one level, I'm the happiest when I'm down in my study, writing, being my nerd and on retreat. But then, like I did my long retreat, by design, with others, you can't wake up without others, and therefore then others become your path, the we aspect, the social, cultural aspect. I think this is incredibly important. I speak from my own experience, because otherwise, then the solitary path, the solitary realizing path, can become a real trap that that again, in the narrative of opening, opening, we then work with the people that press our buttons. We've installed those buttons, so that's interesting. But bringing, bringing, you know, I hit a little run in this morning with the guy who cuts my lawn, and I paid very close attention to that. I said, Oh, first of all, I capitulated to my habit patterns. It was like, Oh crap. There was that again. And then as I stepped away for a second, I said, Oh my gosh, that was Padmasambhava teaching me about patience and so to me, as I come out, and I come out in my really long three year retreat, my aspiration now is to enter lifetime retreat with this view that all these annoying again, that's just my projection, all these annoying aspects of my reality now, those are my path. And I love this because there's tremendous power in tradition. And path is it's traditionally put forth. But there's also colossal enemies, and one of these is just that is that you I can only do this one all the atmospheric conditions are right in my own life, right? And as the world is going to crap right now, I think this becomes a little bit more helpful for us to bring this kind of view to so called unwanted experiences, so that we can bring those onto our own path, realizing that they are our path. Yeah, yep. So anyway, it's like you're interviewing me. I need to back up a little bit. I get so excited I can't help myself. With your permission, Chris, I want to transition into what, again, I thought was just such a dazzling section in your book. Let's talk a little bit more, if you would, about the the light, the diamond Luminosity you mentioned several times early on, this, this phenomena of light, this is, to me, among the most profound aspects of the whole shebang. And so if you can maybe walk us through your exploration of this light and how it worked with you on the path to introduce you to, I think, is this, this fundamental kind of matrix of reality?

Chris Bache  53:48  
Well, this transition took place 15 years into my work. So I had already gone through ego death. I'd gone through the ocean of suffering, of collective suffering. I had navigated through archetypal reality, both the sort of Platonic archetypes and the tissue of our of our species mind, the tissue of the human psyche, and then had been taken into this year of incredible blessings, of of experiences of oneness, of Shunyata, emptiness, of self, cosmic love, primal void. You know, I felt profoundly existentially complete. I mean, I I felt like I had been asked to give something in the ocean of suffering, work, and I gave it, and the universe had just rewarded me with just a cascade of blessings that left me feeling profoundly existentially complete. I mean, I had been given a deep experience of and a new understanding of reincarnation that transcended classical, you know, Easter. And understandings of reincarnation. I had been taken into the birth of the diamond soul. I had been given many visionary experiences of where humanity was going in the future human. And I reviewed these things, just to sort of give a context. And along the way, I had experienced light many times in different modalities in different forms. And then in the I came into a time when I went through yet one more very, very intense death process, which took an entire session, and then the next session I began immediately and trust transported into the fruition portion of the session in which I was taken into this light that was beyond any light that I had experienced before. I dissolved into a Luminosity that was absolutely spell binding and intoxicating. And in my notes, I called it the death state, because it I entered it in a form of dying, which was an ultimate form of dying. It a key point. I was surrounded by a swirling circle, a disc that contained all the moments of my life and I would fall from the center into this circle and touch one of some aspect of my life. And I would instantly die into the state of Luminosity, and then be brought back to the center and fall in a different direction, touching another different set of experiences. And as soon as I did, I would instantly be taken into this death state. And this went over and over, happened over and over, until eventually there was no going and coming. There was just a permanent abiding, or at least a session abiding, in this transcendent Luminosity, the death state, I would say ecstasy. And it's true, but it's it's a different than earlier forms of ecstasy. It just the most striking characteristic of it, for me, was its clarity, clarity, clarity, clarity. I mean, it was the context within which all thinking and all feeling took place. But in itself, it was hyper, hyper, hyper, hyper clear, breathtakingly clear. Just took my breath away, and I understood the teachings that even just touching something like this for one second dissolves 1000s of years of wandering around in the shadows of Samsara, it, and I, as I came to understand it, this was what I understood to be extra samsaric reality, and a particularly intense version of extra samsaric reality. At first I thought of it in terms of sambhagaya because of the extreme bliss of it. But as I really went back to the sources and studied them more carefully, I came to associate it with Dharmakaya, the clear light of absolute reality. The next session, when I went back, of course, all I wanted to do was get back into this condition. I had no interest in exploring the other dimensions that I had gone into, but I did, wasn't taken back into this experience, and I wasn't taken back for another year and five more sessions, very intense purification, very intense kind of cleansing and healing, other things going on. And it was after a year that I went into the diamond Luminosity for the second time. And this is what happened over the next several years, that it would take about a year of very, very intense work, and then I would die awake and again into the diamond Luminosity. The second time I went into the diamond Luminosity was the deepest experience of it that I had any time in any of my sessions. And it was in that deep immersion that I had my cosmological vision completely reversed and turned upside down. I had the experience of a reality of Light Beyond the diamond Luminosity, light I award my field pivoted. I saw reality Far, Far in the distance that was just exquisitely beautiful light. A ray of light hit me, and it completely shattered me. And I called it the absolute light. You know? It was a light beyond even diamond Luminosity and. In that one second, I understood that it's an infinite progression, and I had to give up completely the idea of ever coming to some type of end state, because always, my spiritual tradition had taught me there were end states. That's why I was doing this work, to reach home, or to become one with God or to become, you know, one with the universe and some fundamental, you know, dissolve into the meta, cosmic void. And I began to realize that with that instant, I realized, no, it's an infinite progression, and death will keep coming back as long as you keep pushing, because you never going to reach the end of it. At that point in the next time I went into the depths, into the diamond Luminosity, and the fourth and final time I went into the diamond Luminosity, I wasn't going deeper into the diamond Luminosity, but the diamond Luminosity was crunching itself more deeply into my being, and all the lessons were shifting and pivoting around that it was dissolving the structure of my body. I mean, I could feel it crunching itself into my cellular makeup and very, very intense physical detoxification, purification processes. And then this eventually culminated in the fourth session into the in the experience of giving me an initiation into the Buddha nature, into the pure nature of mind, and I began to understand that that magnificent reality, which has no beginning, it has no end. It always is, always has been. We never have stepped out of that. We never step into it. It is the it is the abiding foundation of all existence that is, in a sense, the embodied diamond Luminosity. It is, it is the closest I've come to to experiencing what diamond Luminosity is like in the body. My other experiences of diamond Luminosity, or diamond Luminosity as they exist as an extra physical reality, an extra Samsara reality. But this was an experience of pure light as the foundation of my very physical existence. Okay, that was the last time I experienced the diamond Luminosity. From there, I went through a couple of experiences, then the final vision in the 70th session, and then basically the consciousness guiding my work wrapped it up, gave me a last set of instructions and sent me on my way. Oh, I

Andrew Holecek  1:03:02  
just want to take want to take 15 seconds to pause and just digest that a little bit.

Chris Bache  1:03:13  
I understand. I've been digesting it for 20

Andrew Holecek  1:03:20  
years, because the the ineffable enormity of it, it, this, this, it's a wonderful is you're sharing this with me, Chris. And by the way, thank you so much for trusting to do that. I find this very interesting dance between kind of the mythopoetic aspect of my being and rendering just bathing in the artistry of what you shared versus Okay, formulating whatever in terms of my references. And so I mean, on one level, I almost hesitate to say anything, because what can one say without just kind of literally watering it down, distorting it but with your understanding, Chris of of Buddhist nomenclature, because I remember in your book, you also shared somewhat interesting synchronicity, that when the diamond Luminosity was introduced to you in this way, literally almost same same day kind of thing, the Vajrayana then became part of your journey and your path. And so using that languaging is very interesting for me. When you say these things. I find it very, very interesting, humbling exploration of my referencing in will, capacity or lack thereof, to understand it okay, like, for instance, oh, that sounds like the Dharma talk. Oh, that sounds like the Dharma Datu. And I really hesitate to say that, because on one level, you, I think you understand it, shrink wraps the enormity of what you're saying into these names. But on another level, we can sit here in silence. Or we can do the best we can with language to talk about something that transcends language and so we do with we can. Yeah. So with that said, Would you, would you, would you resonate with your understanding of the Buddhist tradition and descriptions of someone analogous states clear light mind. Is that another quality that comes in that could say this, you use the term diamond Luminosity. Interesting Vajrayana is the diamond path. But using, and again, without any violation of your own personal experience, are there other Tibetan languaging or Buddhist terms that would relate to what you experienced that you could say that really sounds like the Dharma data you've used Dharmakaya before. But again, I'm trying to simply relate, using my reference structures, to what you're sharing.

Chris Bache  1:05:54  
Yes, there are, I mean, clear light mind, to me, is maybe closer to the nature of mind in term that quality in this is I still, I still am digesting, I'm still trying to appreciate some of the differences between the diamond Luminosity as an extra samsaric reality, and Then the diamond Luminosity as at the foundation of nirmanakaya existence. So there certainly are many correlations and and again, all honor to the Great Beings who have explored these dimensions much more deeply than I've been able to so I mean, always, always humble student, truly humble student of the great teachers. In this respect, I put the names as best as I can to clarify or to qualify, but you're right. I mean, it's tricky because you can this can get shrink wrapped, and that just stops the mystery and just lets the mind back in where it really doesn't belong. So let me just give this a step into a little different framework. The

Chris Bache  1:07:15  
universe is 13 point 7 billion years old. Our planet it's about four and a half billion years old. When we plot the the evolving structure of Homo you know, we go through home, erectus, Homo sapiens, you know, the various stages we got, the big brain, the 50% increase in our brain, about 100,000 years ago, self awareness begins to emerge. You know, along the way and about three to 5000 years ago, we began to develop the technology, the spiritual technology, that allows us to concentrate our mind and bring us down into that part of our being where we are not of the private self, but we touch the life of the world. We touch that which is universal. And there's this tremendous aha, this awakened sense, and we've applied all sorts of names to that experience of our true nature, our essential nature. Now, what whatever this is, and I think you and I have a pretty good sense of what that experience is, what this is. It is the tip of the iceberg of the unfolding, the intentional, exquisite unfolding of this trans, extraordinary consciousness that we might call divinity, or maybe not want to call it divinity, this unfolding which has been gestating in creation for 13 point 7 billion years, and that's only in this big bang. We don't know how many other expansions and contractions of earlier universes precede this particular Big Bang explosion? We don't know. I mentioned this just to underscore the enormity, the profoundness of the reality within which awakening takes place, and the reality within which even deeper and deeper and deeper awakenings take place, as have been recognized by our spiritual traditions, our spiritual additions are only 345, 1000 years old, and that's a lot of time for an incarnating soul to penetrate into the deeper texture of existence. But if we were to go forward in time 100,000 years, and that's a wink of cosmic time, but if we went forward 100,000 years, surely, reasonably, we would expect our great. Great spiritual teachers to be having deeper experiences of the universe than our best spiritual teachers today are capable of having, because it's it's an ongoing developmental process of exploring the deep mystery. So on the one hand, I want to honor and affirm the categories and description. Descriptions of the beings who have lived up to this point in time, and I place my experiences at their feet, and I I seek their guidance and understanding what has taken place. But just as the absolute light came from a reality far beyond whatever the diamond Luminosity is. Likewise, evolution is continuing. Evolution is developing, and we are nowhere near even 10% of human development. And so I would expect and almost demand that we expect deeper and deeper and deeper capacities for spiritual experience to continue to emerge. So on the one hand, we want to use the categories to to help us hold on, to illumine, understand. On the other hand, we don't want to shrink wrap them. We want to stay open. And staying open in this way, I think, is to stay open into is to stay open to a deeper intimacy with the beloved, to stay open to the light that is the light that gives birth to the world, second by second.

Andrew Holecek  1:11:47  
That's really that's exquisite. And what comes to mind again is this wonderful kind of fundamental archetypal narrative of openness, where on one level, the invitation here is an ideological openness that we can very easily, again, the near enemy of tradition, like you, I have tremendous, oh, my goodness, tremendous allegiance, respect for tradition. But if tradition isn't you, I think you understand this in the best sense of the word. Isn't modernized without being edited and distorted, then it can become ossified. You can reify even the tradition, and then we become closed around our ideologies and belief systems. And so what I hear you saying that I really appreciate is this idol ideological openness. Let's, let's keep even open to that. But Chris, if I might a question of clarity, and then a few other things when you, when you use the word extra Samsara that that is not a term that's in my common vocabulary. What What do you mean when you talk about the light as extra do you mean post trans Samsara? What do you mean by extra

Chris Bache  1:12:53  
Samsara? I mean beyond the Bardo, beyond all the layers of the Bardo, beyond all Samsara, at a place where the patterns of cyclic existence have been eclipsed. My sense of it is that in between, you know the physical reality and the rhythms of physical reality. When we die, we enter into various patterns of Bardo reality, various spiritual states, but eventually that says many, many, many layers, 1000s of layers, but one can go beyond that in what is the nature of reality that's beyond the Bardo existence? Yeah, the Buddha refused to describe it very wisely, right? Says, you know, just experience it for yourself. And you know, and my sense is that outside of that, what happens in the upper Bardo and it the light gets brighter and brighter and brighter until you move into a world which is all light, it's just all light, and the quality of Light is is it's different because it's trans Bardo and all individualized existence, and here I have to be careful, because I for one, do not see individuality as the energy enemy of Spiritual Awakening, because when we stabilize deep, deep spiritual awakening. Our individuality is limit, liberated, not extinguished. So I don't want to say that in the domain of extra Samsara Luminosity, there is no individuality, but it is an extraordinarily translucent or an extraordinarily transparent individuality.

Andrew Holecek  1:14:46  
Yeah, I'm going to make it a practice to just pause and work with my usually incredibly habituated reflex to fill the space after you make these i. Amazing statements, because I want to rest in the somatic impact of what you're sharing and not capitulate to my usual intellectual contractive predispositions, which I don't think pay respect and honor to what we're trying to discuss here. But let me ask you this, Chris, so when this is very interesting, I mean, there's so many very profound principles being explored and even challenged here. So I'm wondering how what you're sharing with this. And I was, I was probably as surprised when I read this as you were when you experienced it, the the dissolution of the so called omega point, that there isn't some final destination. And I'm wondering how you might reconcile or balance what you experience as this endless evolutionary unfolding with things, so to speak, quote, unquote, like the changeless nature. And the reason I mentioned this is one way that I've played with this, and again, wonderful to be open challenged along these fronts, is that on one level, emptiness, in this case, emptiness is Dharmakaya. Emptiness doesn't evolve. Form evolves. And so I'm wondering how that lands with you. When, when the Buddhist tradition talks about Buddha, nature is changeless nature. How can something change and evolve that doesn't have form? That's the an oxymoron. Form evolves, not emptiness. So how does that land with you? How do you again? It's like, oh, they we're getting down to the razor's edge of everything here. So how do you is that a dissonance with you? Or where? How do you play with that?

Chris Bache  1:16:54  
It's, I don't feel it as a dissonance, and it is a deep mystery, which I don't pretend to fathom in any profound, you know way. So I'll just share a few bits and pieces on those occasions when I have relaxed into, fallen into, been drawn into the unchanging condition, the unchanging reality, the reality within which everything arises and passes away and it itself is not impacted at all. It is, it appears to be, the fertile empty, the fertile void. I want to hold back emptiness there, the fertile void from within which all existence springs. Now, if we then step into the existence that springs from within this cosmic, fertile, emptiness or void, what's happening. And we just look at the big bang, and we look at the magnificent story of the the explosion of energy and the congealing into matter and the formation of galaxies and the formation of solar systems and Sun Life, and then emergence of life and the emergence of self and then self awareness, and so on and so forth. Clearly, existence seems to be going somewhere, and it seems to just delight in in the in form and the unfolding and complexification and making self aware and awakening and and empowering and the the empowering of the soul, as our former life memories become conscious and we wake up to our 100,000 Year identity, not just our 100 Year identity. So form is going somewhere, and that which is driving form is going somewhere, and it's it's just the magnificent creativity of the universe. And that's why you know the mind of the universe, because I didn't want to call it God, and that's why I got to ever really comfortable with the word Entheogen, because that has Theos and our understandings of God are so limited, so I yield into the cosmologist language of the universe, because we measure the universe in light years 6 million million miles, and it's billions of light years across that bag that huge. And yet, when we right now, as we become self conscious as this, you know, complex biped, and we drop our awareness down to the center of our self, what we find is this magnificent reality which feels to be a. Unchanging, and yet it seems to be at the center of everything which is changing beautiful. So it seems to be clearly kind of a both. And so the Divinity, if we use the word divinity for it, the divinity which delights in existence has, at least, and I don't know whether this is ultimately true, because we may just be scratching the surface even now, but it's nature, that infinite nature, that it seems to be at some level, unchanging at the center perpetual change, and that's kind of the best I can do about it.

Andrew Holecek  1:20:45  
I think it's fantastic, and it's again, completely revelatory of conceptual frameworks, just because concept can't relate to the seeming paradox. It doesn't mean reality doesn't abide by those paradoxes, right? It's only a parrot. It's only a paradox to the conceptual mind.

Chris Bache  1:21:13  
It has no problem, exactly, exactly.

Andrew Holecek  1:21:17  
It's only when we try to shrink wrap it that we enter into the world of paradox and irony. On one level, to me, this is beautiful, because this is, in fact, one of the ways that I've come to register this marvelous dissonance. Isn't the right word. But when, when duality tries to open and wrap itself around Non-duality, which, of course, they cannot do. One characteristic of that is, in fact, this irony, paradox, things that, like the Niels Bohr, I love what he introduced the notion of complementarity. You know, the phenomena can be, it's not either or it's and they can be both light and particle, we you can be both. Chris Bache and the cosmos, who says you can't be both? If Aristotle says we can't be both. You know, we live in his we live in his world. And so one other really important thing for me here, Chris is there does seem to be we talked, I believe, very briefly about this last time, I want to return to it, because this is important to me in terms of path quality. In fact, very notion of path on one level, there seems to be a suggestion in your languaging, in in what you're sharing here, what you shared in your book, this quality of return. I want to return to the beloved. I want to return to the light, longing to return. And perhaps this also lies in with this whole notion of paradox, but I'm also wondering how we can play with that, with what, to me, seems the more immediate aspect of this is a large part I mentioned this because this is a big part of my current path is is really decimating the notion of path itself. That how fair is it, in fact, to say the issue of return is a provisional approach description, and then perhaps a more absolute approach would be around recognition that you're not you don't really need to return to anything. The issue is recognition and self liberation. So does that somehow speak to you when, when you reference longing to return to the mother, to the beloved, to the clear light that, again, denotes the subtle dualism I have to return, versus No, I just need to remove the cataracts of confusion, open the aperture of my heart and mind, and there the light the mother is right in front of me right now.

Chris Bache  1:23:58  
Yeah, absolutely. I think that's a fair observation. Return implies absence, and the nature of union dissolves absence, and so it dissolves the category of return, and it encourages a different set of categories, because it's like the eternal here, the eternal now. It's just here all the time. And so I think that's absolutely true, that it's a, it is. It fits at one level, but then it dissolves itself at a deeper level. Now, having said that again, I want to contextualize this within my particular journey, which is not the same as the journey of spiritual awakening. So the journey of spiritual awakening is this art and craft of awakening into a releasing. All the constrictions of the present self, so that we can live in a state of an abiding transparency, or Shunyata, to life as it flows through us like wind blowing through the trees, and we simply we rest in the abiding present of the universe as it continues to unfold. Cosmological exploration is different. It's kind of like getting into a rocket ship and going into a different at a different solar system in the galaxy, maybe even going into a different galaxy all together and and that is pushing the the capacity of experience, pushing the limits of awareness, so that the condition of remembering reaches beyond even The nature of mind. It's not about simply if, if I were had been seeking only to awaken into the abiding present, I would have adopted a completely different strategy. I think, I think Myron stole Roth's recommendation of working with very, very low doses of LSD in meditation practice would be a better strategy. But the the strategy I used, working with very, very high doses of LSD, pushes consciousness so far beyond enlightenment and and I say that humbly trying not to confuse the categories, not like I'm enlightened and I'm more than enlightened, not like that at all, but it's going beyond the state of the abiding condition of emptiness into the unchanging reality underneath. It's going deeper into physical reality, deeper into consciousness. Reality. Where does consciousness come from? What are the prototypes that inform the very structure of time and space, the prototypes that inform the nature of of archetypal consciousness within the human psyche. What are the very forms that that are giving birth to time and space? What is the light that gave birth to the world, not just the gave birth to our moment to moment exotics, but the light that gave birth to the universe from that condition, there is a sense of return, entering that condition and then coming back from that condition. And that's why I think what you say is absolutely true within a spiritual context, as we usually mean, spiritual return is an oxymoron. It's better to use other categories. But from within a context of cosmic exploration, maybe there's a place, because I personally cannot imagine how I could personally, maybe other beings could and can, and God bless them, but I cannot imagine how I could personally live in some of the places that I have touched. And so I can only visit them as a as a visitor, as a sojourner. And so I come back and I try to bring back as much as I can. I try to cultivate whatever I can of that condition in my daily life. But I know that the vast majority of that reality I will never be able to bring back in this lifetime, maybe 100 lifetimes from now, maybe so I don't know, but I will never be able to. And therefore, in that context, return has a certain ring of truth to it.

Andrew Holecek  1:28:53  
Wow, with again, several things that come to mind here. And again, I You're a philosopher. It's interesting. This is very compelling term for me. I think in many instances, things become philosophy because they haven't become direct experience yet. So then we use that slight pejorative thing, that's philosophy. And so what you're sharing here is, is really quite something. And I wouldn't say this is, is, this is simply to discuss it. I almost said the word challenge it, but that's not the right word to discuss this, that what comes to mind. And so educate me. Teach me are again, I'm completely admissive of my frameworks, because I honestly, unless I sit here in silence, I don't have a choice. In fact, silence is the language of God. All else is poor translation. I'm a poor translator, but I'm doing. Best. So when you something that that rubs me, and I love the rub, because that's what creates the pearl. How do you reconcile? Teach me when you talk about this, this difference, and this is foundational for you, but it does challenge me when you talk about, in fact, the difference between the individual versus the cosmic. Because let's, let's take, for instance, the reference point that does speak to me, Chris, that that I'm finding some refuge in here that maybe is limited of Advaita Vedanta, for instance, that how do you reconcile the duality that's inherent in your statement that separates individual from cosmological because if, in fact, you're saying that that deal still does imply a duality. And so for me, I I'm wrestling, playing, dancing with this idealistic I'm, you know, in Buddhism, as you know, chitta, Mantra, yoga, Chara, the world is heart, mind, spirit. There you're what you're saying here seems to intimate, still some other cosmological versus individual. And so how do you work play with that in terms of the what you were talking about earlier, reconcile that with oneness. Now, because on one level, I seem to hear a monism for you, but now you're talking about dual aspect monism. Again, I feel like I think you understand it. On one level, it's like, oh, please no, don't become a philosopher. Here I am talking about such beautiful stuff, and here I am dual aspect, monism. Oh, please just go away. But I want to understand this a little bit more, so that when I leave this, I'm not merely left with a wonderful which is probably the best, this wonderful transmission from your experience. But how do you play with that? Is there, in fact, an inherent cosmological dualism when you say individual versus cosmic versus a modernism that you seem to suggest throughout your journey.

Chris Bache  1:32:07  
I don't see any dualism in it. And if there is a dualism, it's not of my making. It's of the universe's making. The universe begins as one in some fundamental core, you know, pre BIG BANG, instant Big Bang, it begins as one and it manifests diversity. I didn't choose that. You didn't choose this. We didn't choose it. The Universe chose to manifest diversity. We are part of that diversity, and the universe chose to empower in its process of self emergence, it chose to empower life to become self aware and self empowering. So read, the soul grows and grows and grows. The soul is that consciousness which holds the awareness experience of all of our lifetimes, multiple lifetimes. So we're expanding. We're growing and growing and growing. We didn't choose that. We didn't make ourselves we are discovering a world that was designed before we even billions of years before we even showed up on the scene. So we show up in the scene, and we begin to try to make sense of it, and we begin to try to understand these things. And one thing is very clear, that there is a part, and there is the whole. There are many, many parts, and there is, there is the whole. And when we when our spiritual experience deepens, we have experiences of the whole. And at the same time we experience ourselves as a part. And how do we reconcile those? I think we reconcile them with a deep understanding of emptiness Shunyata and emptiness here is simply emptiness of self, that when we open to the wholeness of life, it's immediately obvious that there is no separate self. We are part of life. We are an abiding part of life. We are a bubble in the ocean. We are part of the process. That's why, to me, oneness and emptiness are two different sides of the same coin. It's simply the experience that I'm living and breathing every molecule of my being, every thought of my being, every consciousness, every soul, everything I am, is part of the manifestation of the universe. I am the universe in that respect, and yet I'm obviously just a little bitty part, a little bitty planet, a little bitty solar system, in a galaxy within multiple building 2 trillion galaxies. So we are part, and we are we. Our Nature is the diet, is the totality of the whole. In that respect, there is no duality, except the duality which is forced upon us by the conditions of life. But there's no ontological duality. There's a functional duality. De but I don't even like to use philosophical categories and metaphysical categories, because that traps us within human thought. In the history of human thought, and the history of human thought, particularly in the western philosophical tradition, is so constrained it is not rooted in deep experience. It's rooted in sensory experience and highly intellectually refined sensory experience, which is why I think, of course, when we turn the to the contemplative traditions, different philosophical insights emerge, or different insights emerge because it's a deeper experience. And I think that's the significance of psychedelics for the West as a philosopher, they not only give us new clinical categories and clinical insights and opportunities to heal the personal psyche, but as a philosopher, they open up the entire world of cosmic experience. And so as we try to digest those experiences and articulate them and understand them. It allows us to draw from a deeper set of experiences, which allows us to basically entertain a deeper set of ideas. So I had a training as philosophy of religion. I might point to that only to differentiate myself from the good psychologists who are working in clinical context. But I don't speak like a philosopher, do I? And I don't do the things that philosophers do, and they would disown me in a minute. They are. They do disown me, you know? So to me, there's no duality. There's a functional duality, which is basically just a bubble on the ocean of time and existence

Andrew Holecek  1:36:43  
that that's an incredible response to basically a very subtle, thorny issue. One one question Chris from the very outset, is when you had the experience of the diamond, Luminosity, post session, post meditation. Where does that light go? What is the relationship of that light to the phenomenal display of the world and appearance? Does the world emerge from that light. Is the world an expression of that light, or both? So, so you, you seem to, not seem you, you entered return to a Luminosity state, and when you, so to speak, came down, came out of it, this world appeared. What is the relationship of the discovery of that light to the perhaps covering up, or that's my languaging. Where does that light go? How is it what is its relationship to appearance?

Chris Bache  1:37:53  
Yeah, good question, which I'm not competent to answer, but I take some pointers from science and some pointers from my experience, the light doesn't go anywhere. Of course, the light is always there. We gain access to it for a period of time, but we withdraw from the light into Plato, would say, the world of shadows. But to me, that denigrates the beauty, the magnificence of physical reality. Scientists tell us that all the world is made of molecules. Molecules are made out of atoms. Atoms are made out of subatomic particles. Ultimately, we get down to quarks. In the end, matter is made out of light. Yeah, correct. So if the scientists are telling us that matter is made out of light, and if we go into our mind and drop into the deepest levels of our mind, and we encounter light. It's like, well, you know, there's that this is such a synergy there. So my understanding is that the light of doesn't disappear. The light is manifesting the physical world. The light is manifesting as the physical world. That means, when we really sit with the whole trying to hold it all together, we get to experience the physical world as the manifestation of the Unified being, of being which is light it manifests. And everywhere we touch the world, we find genius in the creation of solar systems and how stars live and die, and in DNA and in ecosystems. Everywhere we're touching the world, we find layers and layers and layers of genius. And if we keep digging down deep enough, we fall into quantum reality, you know, dark energy, dark matter, light. They call it dark energy, dark matter, but it really should be light energy, light matter. You know, light, light, light. So if I live, if I get depressed, and I live in a state of sadness, or I live in, live in a state of. That disconnection, then that's only that's only my own mind throwing up shadows of illusion. But when I'm clear, when I return to clarity, I see the world as a miracle. Yeah, manifestation. And I love that the Prophet Muhammad said that the only miracle he would cite for the truth of what he was teaching was the miracle of the universe.

Andrew Holecek  1:40:30  
And isn't it worth again? I'm sure you know this, but perhaps it's worth just reinstating that when you say, I experience it, perhaps it experiences itself right there on one level. Yes, we use that languaging. But even then, it's almost it's, it is impossible to talk about this without stumbling into this. It's, it's this, as you know, reflexive awareness of the light itself. And so, yeah, I'm wondering, Chris, is it, is it fair to say that then, I mean, this is so integral to the whole thing, it's literally enveloped in the term enlightenment. This is a and so I of all the teachings, both in physics, cosmology and spirituality, the ones that captivate me the most, that that I find the most ineffably profound are, in fact, these teachings of Luminosity, which inseparable from emptiness. Is emptiness slash Luminosity, is it? Is it fair to say that that what we know is our self sense when we condense and contract from the Unity I'm using my language in here. Please correct me if I'm wrong, from the unity of that formless light back into reified form in the worlds that that arises from that contraction, that that that's a process of dissociation, that on one level, we we again, again, the narrative of openness, when we completely open, die to reality, it reveals itself in this undifferentiated, ineffable unity of of light, and that when we can condense, reincarnate, back into form the minute we do that the world appears as self another, and we simply lose memory. We lose the recollection of this, this fundamental expression of the beloved as as this body of infinite Luminosity and emptiness.

Chris Bache  1:42:40  
I think there is a sad way of doing that, and then there's a happy way of doing that, or so maybe there's a pathological way, but then there's an entirely healthy way, and imagine it this way. I mean, let's use God language temporarily, just because it's kind of handy if, if we were to become one with God for an hour. And if God is the essence and totality of all life forms, then we would be becoming one with all life forms. And just imagine the nearby life forms in your neighborhood that that would involve becoming one with all the Beatles and ants and grasses and seeds and cockroaches, I mean all the human beings and all their manifest forms. There's so many layers and layers and layers and layers of life. So when we say about, well, we're becoming one with God, we don't really mean, oh, my God. We became one with the billions and billions of ants that are, you know, right in my neighborhood. But in fact, if God is one, if all life is one in God, then that's what involves. So what happens, I think, is that we do become one with one. We kind of reconnect to the one. But the happy way is that when we come back, I don't come back into being an ant, I don't come back into being a toad or bird, I come back into being Chris, a human being, and there is a happy and healthy way in which I come back into this individual life form which recognizes that its essence is the same as the essence of those ants and birds and toads. No better, no different. It's more complicated, but the essence is the same. There is that profound kinship with all of existence. I happen to be a human bubble. They are other kinds of bubbles. Together, we make up the unified existence of the totality. Let's sing in celebration. We work together. We didn't choose it. We didn't create it. We are awakening up within it. It is the design of a deeper intelligence, a deeper organization that's that's manifesting itself in joyful diversity. We we. We can enjoy the diversity. We can acknowledge it and be comfortable within it, and I don't think there's anything pathological about it. In fact, there's an ecstatic joy in celebrating being a human being in the in the now, if we exalt our humanness at the expense of other life forms, and we're willing for them to go extinct in order to allow us to buy a bigger you know, bigger and better and whatnot. Of course, there's a steep, deep pathology there. But when it's truly liberated, our our individuality is recognized as a gift, just an extraordinary gift, and a responsibility. We have to handle that responsibility in order to protect the well being of all the life forms that we are part of, that that are around us. Then the de the sense of our common ground, the sense of the common ground out of which all life emerges, I think, deepens and deepens and deepens and so I don't really this is, again, a sort of eco psychology and eco spirituality. We can't really awaken as a as a separate self, without simultaneously awakening as an earth self, an earth being.

Andrew Holecek  1:46:17  
Yeah, that's that's fantastic. And and talk about applicability. Sometimes it's easy to think that these are kind of elite, treasured, sterile, Ivory Tower spiritual experiences, but really these, there's nothing more practical, more applicable. This. This is the farthest from being philosophy, this is the most radical transformation in view from which activism, whatever you want to call it, enlightened activity, extraordinarily practical, applicable behaviors and actions arise spontaneously from this. And I think this also cannot be overstated, because, to me, my big bug these days, if, if what we're discussing here is can't be of benefit to what's happening in the world, it's irrelevant. And this is far from irrelevant. This is, this is absolutely foundational for this is right view. It is ultimate basis. You from this, from this foundation, spontaneously, without thought, arises the activity that is is appropriate for this day and age and so Chris as we well, let me ask you this, when I, when I hear you, you talking about these experiences. These are, these are types of Samadhi states. You're you're entering into particular absorption states, like when you're bathing in the light, you become the light. That's a type of that's a luminous Samadhi. Why does it end? Why? Why? Why does post meditation, post session still take place? Why? Why not abide in that light eternally? What brings what's what brings you back in? It seems, on one level, it's involuntary, right? So, in a certain way, we're talking about rebirth processes. What is the rebirth process? Involuntary due to the unpurified habitual patterns that still bring us back because of their karmic power. Why? Why does the Samadhi and Yeah,

Chris Bache  1:48:40  
well, once again, there are some beings for whom their Samadhi does not end. But even those beings experience a movement in and out. You know, they live at different levels at different seconds of every hour. I would say my Samadhi ends because I'm not. I'm a being who cannot sustain those levels of purity or those levels of clarity in my current condition. So the habits of consciousness reassert themselves, the habits of my embodiment reassert themselves, and I once again, am kind of looking at the world through the levels of awareness that I can manage in my embodied existence. But in a sense, there is a again, we spirit. Is the goal spiritual awakening, or is the goal cosmological exploration? If the goal is spiritual awakening, then there is a way in which we can realistically aim to enter into a kind of Samadhi which is abiding and allows us to live with a profound sense of freedom within the context of life. If the if the experience. Mental trajectory is cosmological exploration. Then the burden of that at least as in this path that I practice, and I'm just, let's just stay there and not talk about the comparative other paths. The burden of that discovery is that it's temporary. The burden is that it's a Samadhi state, or maybe even Samadhi is not the right word for it, to go beyond, to experience the future, to experience the future of humanity in a realistic, graphic sense, to experience the purpose of time, space, existence, and a profound expansion of time that allows you to span millions and millions of years of history and understand and absorb it, to take it in. I mean, I don't how could one possibly live in that condition and have breakfast, really? So that's just no if you want to understand those things, here's a way of doing it, but then you have to, you have to come back, and now you have to live in my 72 year old self, and I have to cut the grass, and I have to do my things, and that's okay, because if, if you do it well, there is a happy way of coming back, yeah, and integrating and recognizing the limits of what you experienced. It's a temporary condition. No big deal not to make too much of it, learning more as I go. You know, just so there's a there's a healthy way, and then there were all sorts of unhealthy ways of doing it, but hopefully healthy way it is. There is an abiding calm and trust, an abiding trust in the wisdom of the universe, in its self, emergent glory, yeah,

Andrew Holecek  1:52:05  
would it be fair to say, Chris, therefore that, I mean, I hear rebirth, reincarnation. We're basically talking about this fundamental process. Is it fair to say that rebirth really takes place in two dimensions of experience, the degree of openness we can tolerate, in other words, what what they're there by, can bring the end of and this is important term for me that differentiates my understanding of Buddhism from other traditions. What ends the process of involuntary rebirth is, in fact, the ability to coming back to this central narrative of openness, to open, open, open, open, open to such a new degree. We're so familiar with it, we're so comfortable with it that fundamentally, when that state is revealed at the moment of death, we we abide in and as that fundamental openness, and then when we do return, as you know, we do so out of love, manifestation of compassion, of chuku phenomena, voluntarily embodying our wisdom, not involuntarily embodying our confusion. And at that point, it's not that rebirth ends, involuntary rebirth ends. And just like you said, done, the play Leo rolper continues, infinitely out of love and compassion in the service of others. Is that a fair way to share or express your understanding of this? Again, I'm trying to dance around the dissolution of the Omega point, right, that this is the final goal. But on one level, yeah, on one level, it is the final goal for self, the cessation of that self, but then it's just the beginning of this endless voluntary display of wisdom and compassion.

Chris Bache  1:54:08  
I think it's a very fair description. I think what ends is the involuntary nature of reincarnation. And we transition into voluntary incarnation, and with that comes, I mean, and I think we, our future incarnations are not the same as our past incarnations in this respect. And the way I've language this, the way it was shown me in the sessions, is that long term or short term. I mean, in long term, however, it manifests itself intermittently. I think in the end, we all become tool. We all become voluntarily incarnate, the human when the entire planet is populated by self, consciously incarnated beings, humanity. Will have transitioned to a new level of its evolutionary trajectory. And the way this was presented to me in the sessions was the re the birth of the diamond soul. So all my former lives at one point, started coming into me, coming into me. And when they hit, they hit a critical mass, and they fused into one. And when they fused into one, this diamond light blew out of my chest and catapulted me into a deep, deep, deep state of consciousness that was individualized. It was individual consciousness, but it was individuality actualized in a way that I had no previous experience of, and I think that that's where humanity is going. All of us are incarnating every generation. Billions and billions of people are incarnating, incarnating over and over again, over and over again. Sooner or later, the entire species not only becomes awakened, but the entire species gives birth to this deeper spiritual awareness which has been gestating inside it all of this time, all these hundreds and hundreds and 1000s of lifetimes, until we awaken into our deeper awareness, which is not just the awareness of enlightenment, to the awareness of awakening, but it's the awareness of our history. It's the awareness of our relationship to the universe. It's a deeper intimacy with the intelligence of the universe, the deeper intimacy with all life forms on this planet. This is When soul consciousness, and I don't mean soul in a anti Buddhist way, but in a way that's compatible with Shunyata emptiness, but soul consciousness awakens, so that we awaken to the being that we are in the community of beings as they are on a planet at this particular stage of its evolutionary development with billions of years ahead of us, and so I think we're just beginning to see the edges. When we first encountered enlightenment to 5000 years ago, we called it escape moksha. We escaped Samsara, right? Let me get out of here. But now we're beginning to understand now we want to awaken here and in the awakening here we humanity makes a pivot into a new stage of the evolutionary story, and a not not just a larger stage, but a more peaceful stage, peaceful of heart, non violent, more compassionate, more insightful, more creative. That's the kind of planet that I think we're giving birth to right now. And all of our individual spiritual aspirations and and pure face purification aspirations and healing aspirations and justice aspirations, all of this are all organically part of this deeper story. And the deeper story is that humanity is coming to a point where it no longer has the liberty of living at the lower level of maturity that it's lived at in the past. We cannot afford. We can't run a planet run by egos. We have to grow up. And when we grow up, we grow up into this higher form of spiritual awareness that the spiritual teachers have been telling us about for 1000s of years. But this begins a turning point in human history. That's what we're trying to give birth to, what I call the future. Human people give all sorts of different names to it. We can all feel it in our bones. It's Maitreya. It's that higher level of realization that is working its way to us.

Andrew Holecek  1:58:50  
You know, that's really, really exquisite. And I'm wondering, if you know, I understand the languaging, but I'm wondering if growing down might be a more appropriate embodied aspect, because the growing up is again fundamentally moksha, escapist, FedEx my consciousness to a pure land when it's really waking down into the majesty, somewhat nice way to start to close things up with The integration of your work, the waking, down, bringing, metabolizing, digesting, incorporating, literally incorporating, bringing into Soma body. You know this, this vast realization. But Chris, if, if you don't mind me being slight, devil's advocate here, that's just for my stance. Sure, I I've become very interested, fascinated for some decades with development, structural development, not just not just spiritual. And this is where I like integral approaches. And so I take utter, complete delight in this vision. And make aspirations that's may it be, so that we can all become tukus. But I'm also wondering, again, wishful thinking, you talk in your book about these evolutionary breakthroughs, when I look at the world and i i see what's happening, and we can't even agree as a society to wear a mask for the benefit of each other. Why? Why should there be, at this point something special that would occur, like a meteor hitting this earth of sanity, wisdom and insight that would shake us from our collective slumber and bring us to this collective evolution and awareness. It doesn't seem to work that way. Evolution stumbles and trips along these very painful, laborious, long stretches of time. I revel in what you're saying, but I'm less optimistic than I used to be, that I look at this world and I put my finger up to the winds that are blowing, and it doesn't it's not blowing in the right direction, yeah.

Chris Bache  2:01:12  
So be getting worse. They seem to be going away, right?

Andrew Holecek  2:01:16  
So I'm curious outside of of your experience, and that that's ultimate refuge for you. What else outside of that, if there is anything else, gives you the conviction to say that that we're heading towards this evolutionary break through as a species. Can the big question these days, will we do it in time? I personally I'm not so sure. I try to retain my optimism, yeah, but it's conjecture on my part, so I'm curious how that that challenge slash rub lands with you. The development doesn't seem to work this way.

Chris Bache  2:01:54  
Yeah, outside of my visionary experience, I have nothing to say, I you know, we all look at the data. We all see what's going on. We see the stupidity and insanity around us. We see a growing eco crises, series of eco crises. We anticipate the desertification of the middle America. We see fat and famine on the horizons already started, but penetrating into middle class experience slowly, we see the we're told that the oceans a 12 foot rise has already baked into the into reality, unstoppable by 2050 12 feet by 2050 where we can calculate How many billions of people will be flooded out of where they live and where I mean, we know we're coming into extremely difficult times. We see the forces of conservatism. We see the reactionary, regressive forces that are manifesting in politics internationally. We see a higher concentrations of wealth into smaller and smaller numbers of people, we see very, very dangerous and forbidding trends. And so outside of my visionary experience, I have no certainty or surety that this is going someplace good. So the nature of my experiences, if there and if there is any, well, the nature of my experience is that, starting about around 1992 93 I started having these consistent visions coming in completely by surprise, just as I had not anticipated that one could possibly do any type of therapeutic work and healing some aspect of the collective psyche. I had no idea that it was even possible to consider having insights into humanity's evolutionary trajectory. But now, once I lived with this for years, I began to understand that this is a natural thing, just as we have, as we go deeper within our personal life, we have a deeper understanding and experience of our trajectory of our personal life. One can go deep If one lives in service of the collective, one can have a deeper and penetrating understanding of the collective trajectory. And in that context, my experience has been consistent over years and years and years of psychedelic experience and visionary experience, first many years of basically saying humanity is coming to a turning point. We're coming to a before and after. We're coming into a to a dawn of something fantastic. We're coming to a genuine spiritual awakening that everything that our spiritual traditions have been describing for the individual. Guess what? It's not an individual thing. It's collective thing. This is a call. Collective dynamic, the forces of the Collective Unconscious are activated, not just my personal unconscious. And then at that critical time in 1995 when I had the 55th session, and it and it when I was expecting to be taken back into the diamond Luminosity, it dissolved me into the collective psyche. It dissolved me into the collective unconscious. Took me into deep time, into an expanded sense of time. And in that state, I experienced the death and rebirth of humanity. I experienced a global systems crisis that led to billions of people, billions of people dying, just a total unraveling of cultures we have known it, of civilization as we've known it, a complete i i experienced our entire species losing control of its story, losing control of its life on this Planet, just being put under enormous, terribly crushing pressure of death and destruction. And it looked for a time, it felt for a time as this, this was an extinction event, that we were really going extinct as a species. But that, and I was given no details. I wasn't giving a timeline. It wasn't given anything, given the experience of the species going through a Death Event on this planet, all of us together, and then I experienced that the storm began to pass. The storm began to subside, and those of us who are still alive picked themselves up and began to rebuild, and what we were was different than what we had been before and what we be, what began to happen was a synergistic of conscious Creativity, a synergistic of compounded freedom, a synergy of compounding insight, a new set of values, a new set of understandings, a new set of capacities were manifesting themselves, that humanity as a whole was going through a process that every spiritual aspirant has had knowledge of a complete collapse of reality, saying known it, and a waking up into a more spiritually animated whole, magnificent, beautiful, conscious awareness that humanity was going through this process. And then in the very in my 70th session, the very, very last session, once again, it gave me kind of a capstone experience, which took me deep into the future. And it showed me the archetypal structure of this future human, the archetypal form of it. And truly, I mean, it brings tears to my eyes, just to even remember it, to think of it. This is a this is a truly different form of humanity. It's like the best of the best of us in it, our hearts healed, our minds opened. Outside of my visionary experience, I have no reason for suggesting what I have suggested as that humanity is coming to this turning point, this evolutionary pivot point. I know that evolution has dead ends, and, you know, whole species die off, and whole planets could die off, and I know that there's no cognitively compelling reason for having hope. And as we enter the next century, as we enter what's going to happen in this century, we are going to lose hope again and again, and that's why I think it's really important to have a vision, an understanding of what's taking place at a deeper level, because it's going to get bad. I mean, really realistically, we could be looking at more than half of the human population of Earth lost, and we'll watch it on television every night, and it's just it's going to wrack us with terrible pain, but inside, we're going to be led to do things that we would not otherwise do. We're going to be we're going to be cracked open in this pain and suffering, just as in a meditation, deep meditation, justice and deep psychedelic experience, we will reach deeper into ourselves and we have ever reached before, and we will accomplish something that we might never accomplish without this ordeal of pain. Now, the other thing that I was shown in the 55th session was some of the mechanism responsible for doing. Doing this that was in I was shown this over and over and over again, taken through it and until I it was made sure I understood it. And I'll just mention it here and point to the book. And that is, it has to do with the functioning of the collective psyche, and in this time of accelerate, accelerated and intensified individual suffering. It's not just our individual psyches that are be activated, but all of the suffering of humanity gathers in its process at a centralized level, as more as morphogenic feel. Sheldrake has helped us understand and so that the scenario that was unfolded was

Chris Bache  2:10:47  
the collective psyche will move into such a highly energized state that it will begin to operate as a non linear system. Are far from equilibrium system, and we know something about how physical systems operate when they enter into non linear conditions. They are capable of accelerated change. Small perturbations produce expanded outcomes. Creativity emerges from within the system in unprecedented way, hydrogen and oxygen combined to produce oxygen, I mean, to produce water. Things happen that are unanticipated according to a system operating in linear systems. And this was shown me that this future is going to take place, this pivot is going to take place much faster than we could ever imagine if we used our calculation based upon the past, it's going to take pace faster, more quickly. It's going to be deeper than anything that we could imagine in the past. Now I I know that sounds like optimism run amok, and I understand and everybody has to make their own decisions on this. All I can do is simply here, report the vision and let it go at that. And then we're all in this together, you and I, and our children and grandchildren, we're all in this together.

Andrew Holecek  2:12:11  
Yeah, yeah. I mean, it's interesting. Part of me says, May it be so, and another part of me says, May it not be so, then I'm wondering, Chris, as we start to wrap up, I know your time is valuable. We've covered so much amazing material, really, and prescriptions, what, what? I'm a level, some, some things are implied with our time together, but prescriptions, what what to do, or in a certain sense, not to do, how to bring our individual, empowered selves or lack thereof, to to actually help this world, both now and you know, for our ancestors. So some let's, let's end on some prescription notes, if we might,

Chris Bache  2:13:08  
in terms of the transition that I've been describing, someone that I know and love and respect very dearly, who has thought a great deal about what we can do, how we can accelerate this process, how we can remove the worst of the pain and move into the this new future better quicker. Is Dwayne Elgin and his book choosing Earth is a beautiful book, powerful book, small book. He lays out what he thinks the next five decades are going to look like, and it's not a pretty picture, it's it's a frightening picture. But he also lays out a series of prescriptions, of prescriptions for how we can engage this future, how we can bring about a safe landing, how we can change and engage socially, individually and socially. And I think he his advice is worth much more than mine. Dwayne Elgin choosing Earth, and he's giving the book away. You can get a PDF on Amazon. It's giving he's giving it away because it's so important. He's not trying to hold on or make money on it himself. He's it's all in service of humanity. I would step also add to that reminder that from a reincarnation perspective, each one of us, every one of the 1000s and 1000s of listeners in your program, and all of us around the world, we chose to be incarnated at this time in history. We chose to be incarnated at the time and place that we incarnated with the talents and challenges that we brought into this incarnation. We are exactly where we are supposed to be in order to make a creative offering to this time and. History, we don't have to go look elsewhere. The only real question is, do we have the courage to actualize, to activate the potential that we are standing on right here, right now, once we make that commitment, that our life, my life will count towards the good. Then we look around us and we say, Okay, what needs to happen? What? What are we trying to become? And then we put our hands to work. And since we're all different and we all have different missions and different agendas, some of us are in the medical field, some of us in the political field and philosophical field and creative field, and hard labor, all these things, every human talent will be required to bring this about. So it's not a matter of kind of looking elsewhere. It's simply a matter of looking at where one is already incarnated to make service spiritual practice is important, facing the shadow, clarifying the shadow, becoming open and individually receptive. Community is important, not only practice community, but social community, learning how to do more with less, sharing, restructuring society, political community is really important. We see what happens when ego runs amok in our politics. All these things are needed. All of these things are important. All we have to do is look around and see what needs to be done and give ourselves to it completely.

Andrew Holecek  2:16:38  
Wow, wonderful. Wow. Anything that you wish I would have asked

Chris Bache  2:16:49  
any, any, I don't know, yeah, it's in serious territory, partner, yeah,

Andrew Holecek  2:16:54  
rich, but as we really wrap up, I mean, there's so many summary statements here, but any, any other final thoughts or questions you felt should have been directed your

Chris Bache  2:17:06  
way? No, you know, you mentioned the living classroom in the beginning, and it's not, it's too late to go into a large excursus. But the basic, the core of that book, which doesn't mention psychedelics, is the core truth that's manifesting there is that consciousness is unified from the start, so that everything we do in our individual sphere, our individual field, radiates out around us 360 degrees. It all of our spiritual practice, all of our actions, everything we do radiates around it, touches and interacts with the consciousness of the beings around us. Knowing this, then we take more responsibility for making sure we're sending out, you know, a positive experience in the world. You know, beneficial experience, and we are never, ever, ever isolated from those around us. We it may be invisible, it may be subtle, you know, but it's always there. And the more we act on that basis, the more we activate the strength of those sinews that bind us to life. And if this is true, of course, not just for human beings other human beings, it's true for all the life forms that surround us. And that's the core teaching of the living classroom, that there's an atomistic quality to teaching, and then there's a quantum quality to teaching. So like you and I have been having kind of a, in some ways, an atomistic conversation, but we can trust that there's a quantum, a quantum quality to our conversation, yeah, yeah,

Andrew Holecek  2:18:53  
field effect that is that extends beyond our limited self sense, which is illusory in nature, and we have these, I think, the wonderful way to end, because really, it invites us to really discover that we have so much more power than we think in both negative and positive ways, and the thoughts that we hold, the aspirations, the motivations, It's not just encapsulated in this little ball of skin. It just, it's a pebble radiating out throughout the cosmos, not just this world. And I think really understanding that will empower our ways to benefit the world. So Chris, I can't thank you enough for spending so much time with us. I It's really quite remarkable. I'm thrilled to have spent this time with you. I've learned so much. I applaud your bravery, your heart, your capacities in doing this. It's marvelous, and it's really being of great benefit.

Chris Bache  2:19:49  
So thank you for the conversation, Andrew, thank you for your work, bringing this conversation and many similar conversations into the world. Conversations change. Lives. Thank you for what you do, and just thank you for the opportunity to talk about these things together. It's been,

Andrew Holecek  2:20:07  
it's been a delight for me too, and like we talked briefly last time, this, this, I haven't really thought of it before. The dialog, the conversation, the sharing, is actually a quality of path itself is new for me, and I haven't really thought of it that way. So it's a wonderful insight of many that you shared. So thank you so much for everything. Let's do it again with the next book that comes out.

Chris Bache  2:20:28  
Oh no, help me, but I'm always happy to have a conversation with you.

Andrew Holecek  2:20:33  
Yeah, really, yeah. It's such a delight, Chris, till next time, thank you so much for your time. Good heart. Love and blessings. Love and blessings. Thank you, bye, bye.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
