Chris Bache  0:00  
And all of a sudden, my visual field pivoted 90 degrees, and I saw reality Far, Far in the distance. Again. It looked kind of like galaxies. And out of that reality, a beam of light came and hit me, and it absolutely shattered me. It just it was a more powerful light than even the diamond Luminosity that had become my ultimate reality, 50 high dose sessions in and just in that one second, it completely changed my understanding of reality.

Luc Briede-Cooper  0:33  
Thank you, Chris, thank you for being willing to hop on with me.

Chris Bache  0:38  
Glad to be here today. Luke, cool, everyone.

Luc Briede-Cooper  0:42  
This is Christopher M Bache. He's a PhD and professor emeritus in the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at Youngstown State University, where he taught for 33 years an award winning teacher and international speaker. Chris's work explores the philosophy philosophical implications of Non-ordinary states of consciousness, especially psychedelic states. And today, we'll be primarily discussing ideas related to his book, LSD and the mind of the universe, his story of 20 years of his journey into the mind of the universe through 73 high dose sessions of LSD. Welcome Chris.

Chris Bache  1:20  
Thank you, Luke, it's good to be here with you. Awesome.

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:24  
So I thought I'd figured I'd start by just sort of tracing the path that a lot of people may explore with psychedelics, first being that the first encounter people may have, at least now today, is they may encounter psychedelics for biohacking or for productivity, say, with like micro dosing. And then once they've experienced that, maybe they'll discover the therapeutic power of psychedelics. And then in those therapeutic journeys, maybe they'll discover that psychedelics are powerful tools for spiritual awakening. But there's a level even deeper than the level of spiritual awakening, and it's the path that that you took. Could you tell us about that?

Chris Bache  2:00  
Well, that path I call cosmological exploration, and it's a path which clearly overlaps with the healing capacity of psychedelics and the spiritual awakening capacity, but it's different. I think the spiritual awakening basically invites us to clean our consciousness and clean our system in a way that allows us to abide more comfortably and consistently in a transparent condition, transparent to what the Buddhists would call one's essential nature, one's Buddha nature, or other traditions would call one's divine nature. Cosmological exploration is different than that. It really is seeking to explore the deep structure of consciousness and the deep structure of the universe, to basically understand at a deeper philosophical level, how reality works. Why are things the way they are? What are some of the deep structures of cosmic reality? Awesome?

Luc Briede-Cooper  3:10  
And I'd love to ask you more in a bit about reality itself and those and those layers. But could you tell us a bit more just about what the path, the sort of protocol you followed, and what that path looked like as he

Chris Bache  3:22  
went along. Well, I was just out of graduate school back in ancient history in 1978 and I read Stan Grof first book, realms of the human unconscious, which had been published in 76 and immediately I recognized the significance of Stan's work for my discipline, which is philosophy of religion. I'm not a psychologist, not a therapist. I've never been particularly interested in the therapeutic applications as Stan has, but I'm really have been interested in its philosophical applications. So recognizing kind of a call I began my work, which ended up lasting 20 years. I did four years of very intense work. I stopped for six years, and then I followed that with 10 years of very intense work. I chose to work with high doses of LSD, and by high doses, I worked at 500 to 600 micrograms. This is a regimen that I don't recommend today. I seriously don't recommend, and if I were doing it over again, I would do it differently. I would be much gentler use, lower doses and a wider distribution, a wider spectrum of psychedelics. But I chose to work with high doses of LSD for couple of reasons. One's first LSD, that was the substance that Stan had done most of his research on, and I trusted that research. And again, this was 1978 so this is pre Ayahuasca, pre, some of the early. Uh, appreciation of organic and shamanic tradition, organic psychedelics used by shamanic traditions. And I, I worked with high doses because I was still thinking within a model of personal transformation, our personal spiritual awakening, and the spiritual traditions basically taught that our karma is finite. And if I understood LSD psychotherapy as a process of cleaning up one's karma, so to speak, you know, basically unearthing problematic material from one's personal unconscious and clearing that material, I thought by working with high doses, I could basically clear up my karma in a fewer number of sessions, essentially taking a bigger bite out of the apple in every session. Turns out that that assumption was completely wrong, because the assumption that that the human psyche, that this process was primarily focused on human transformation was a mistake, a personal transformation. The collective dimensions of the psyche surface in my work very quickly on after just a couple of years, and the broader ramifications of entering into communion with the universe at large presented itself soon thereafter. So what I basically did, I worked in therapeutic protocol. Stan's therapeutic protocol outlined in his book LSD psychotherapy, which means working in total isolation with a sitter, lying down, eye shades, headphones, carefully curated playlist of music, staying internalized all day long, I would work in the early morning through to evening, staying internalized in the session, and then making detailed records of my experiences the day after. So that was the that was the protocol.

Luc Briede-Cooper  7:01  
Got it awesome. And of course, reading the book, I know a little bit about where that went in the end, but I'm curious. So I know in another interview, you mentioned that you had since partaken in Psilocybin and Ayahuasca journeys, and at one point in the book, you mentioned that one of the advantages of LSD being sort of a longer acting substance around eight hour journeys that it kind of buffs the diamond more in that time, so to speak. I know there's other psychedelics that are now entering the potential use for people in society, and Ibogaine is one substance that has a very long active time about like 24 to 48 hours. And we could contrast that with like five Meo DMT, which is an active period of like 1520 minutes, something like that, would eyeball game potentially be a better contender for that reason, if not for cosmological exploration, but for spiritual awakening. And what might the protocol look like if you were to use something like five mu DMT?

Chris Bache  8:03  
Well, first of all, I've never used Ibogaine, and so I'm not really qualified to speak to that in terms of comparing its function or values just looking at the window issue. There are other issues with psychedelics. Every psychedelic has a mind amplifying quality, but the texture, or the nuance, the way it opens consciousness, the spectrum of consciousness that it opens us into varies from psychedelic to psychedelic. But just looking at the window, the reason I think the window is significant, and this is basically reflecting on people's experiences with DMT initially, which is a relatively short acting psychedelic. And Rick Strassman, in his book DMT, the spirit molecule, basically found that his his clients were not really changed very deeply by very having very significant DMT experiences. And in looking at his experiences in his data, comparing it to my data, I think what happens is, you know, in order to explore the universe, you're you're going, you're using your small mind to explore big mind, you're using your individual, personal consciousness to explore this vast field of consciousness. And when you have a long window, it gives more time for the large field to interact with the small field and do the cleansing and purification that's needed in order to have deep experiences of this cosmic reality. If you have only a very short acting psychedelic, you don't have much time for the large consciousness to impact and be absorbed by the smaller consciousness, which means it has less of an of an activating effect, less of a transformative effect. You. There are other variables, of course, in the psychopharmacology of psychedelics, but just the window is, I think, an interesting variation. The short acting psychedelics have been like five Meo are. It's a remarkable psychedelic. It gives us quick access if you use it in high doses to very deep cosmic realities, but our time there is short. Again, I don't have a lot of experience with five Meo, and I certainly don't work with it clinically with other people. I've talked with a number of therapists who work with five Meo at different levels of intensity for working with clients. I know it has remarkable transformative value, but I not really too comfortably comparing its transformative potential with the transformative potential of LSD, other than to make this simple relation between a time window and opportunity for transformation.

Luc Briede-Cooper  11:04  
Got it awesome. Thank you. Yeah, and one of the things that stood out about the book was how very, not exaggerative. You know what I mean? Like, it isn't you don't necessarily go too far from the experience itself, and maybe that's your inclination as a philosopher and academic, but I really appreciate that.

Chris Bache  11:22  
So I tried to just truly, it's a huge challenge, of course, to try to document or to present 20 years of such dramatic experiences. So the choice I made was really try to keep close to the phenomenology, keep close to the experiences, because the experiences were, to me, much more valuable than anything I would say about them, any interpretation I might offer, just the raw experiences themselves.

Luc Briede-Cooper  11:55  
Got it so I got a question. Now you don't recommend that people do what you did. And reading the book, initially, I was feeling inspired. I was seeing your courage. I thought, wow, this is amazing. Maybe this is something I could explore by the end. That sort of shifted. But overall, psychedelic, psychedelic use for spiritual awakening is basically inevitable at this point, at least for many people in society. So for someone who might use psychedelics for spiritual awakening and not necessarily cosmological exploration, what might you recommend as a protocol or structure for people who want to do like a slower psychedelic path, and how might that integrate with the slow burn traditions?

Chris Bache  12:39  
Well, I'll make a suggestion. But again, I want to emphasize that I'm not a clinician. I don't work I don't have a history of working with other people. I basically have made a self conscious choice not to work with other people, but to be simply a solitary explorer, pushing my system hard, making basically a map of the dimensions that I entered into, but I don't that doesn't give me a lot of experience working with other people to answer your question. But basically, as I've read the literature and process my own experience for spiritual awakening, I would recommend very low doses. Basically, spiritual awakening is about dissolving the glue that holds the ego in place, dissolving the structures that keep us fixed in these repetitive patterns of thoughts and emotions. And so you've got to kind of ferret out the ego where it lives in the world. And I think this is done well with low doses of LSD, low doses of LSD combined with sustained meditative practice, once in a while, doing more in order to challenge the boundaries of consciousness. But basically, if the goal is spiritual awakening, I think low doses of a psychedelic would be the way to go.

Luc Briede-Cooper  14:06  
Cool, awesome, awesome. Thank you for that. Something that was interesting that I think some people do get a sense of from their own journeys, whether or not they've had just a few over time, is there, there seems to be a kind of effect of having just the right amount of experience as they needed at the time. In that journey, you experienced something similar in in your journeys, in your book, could you tell us about like that sense of guidance?

Chris Bache  14:38  
Well, in all of my work, I always felt myself engaging and being engaged by a larger consciousness. This consciousness did not take concrete form. It never took personified form. It never took concretized form and it changed or the core. Qualities of this consciousness change the deeper I went, so that I began to understand the way I think of it is the consciousness that we enter into communion with in psychedelic states, is an infinite consciousness that's capable of generating any number of different types of experiences, or types of awareness within us and our mind acts as a seed catalyst, a seed crystal that catalyzes a certain set of experiences from this infinite consciousness.

Chris Bache  15:38  
If you do this repetitively over repeatedly, the experiences that you have and you integrate, internalize and go through the various purification processes, it changes your consciousness, and therefore the consciousness that you take into the next encounter is a different consciousness that catalyzes a deeper set of experiences from the infinite potential of consciousness. And that means that the what you experience as this guiding intelligence, the this massive intelligence that you meet at different levels is, in a way, a consciousness that arises at the intersection between your individual mind and this universal mind, and as you change, the intersection changes so that, from my experience, the consciousness, which I felt was always guiding my sessions, was always invisible To me, but was always felt it didn't adopt concrete form, or very seldom adopt concrete form, because the form would change as the experiences deepens. So you know that formless quality is, I think, something innate to do with the consciousness itself, and then in going beyond the collective level of consciousness, between beyond the collective psyche and even beyond human history. When you're pushing so deep, you're going beyond Jung's category of archetypal consciousness, you're letting you're going beyond human history altogether, all of the interpretive frameworks, all the images, all the concepts that we associate with our religious and spiritual history, they just fall away. Basically, if several 1000 years or five or 10,000 years of religious history just fall away and you're moving into states of consciousness that go beyond any category of gods or deities or angelic beings, you're in a completely different world. So yes, always guidance, always an intelligence engaging me, but formless.

Luc Briede-Cooper  18:04  
Yeah, yeah, amazing, amazing. I have yet to get to that level in my particular journeys, but perhaps some day. And I'd like to ask more specifically about sort of the forms that can appear, partly because I know from YouTube, a lot of people are searching that I can see the analytics that entity encounters is a very popular and interesting point of conversation. And you mentioned you explored a little bit more in the book, and you speak about how devotion is related to these entities. But let me ask this, like a guy I was speaking to an integration circle in Victoria here not too long ago, he mentioned he had a mystical experience where he encountered none other than Ganesh, the elephant god of Hinduism. And when people have these encounters, they may ask a question that you asked in your journeys, which was, you know, what is the meaning of what I experienced? So, for after your journeys, how would you reflect on sort of the meaning of encountering, say, a particular form of a deity or or something like that?

Chris Bache  19:14  
First of all, let me qualify. I don't consider my experiences normative, you know, in any generalizable way, you know there are so many different medicines, so many different ways of using those medicines, and so many different personalities that are using the medicines to engage this infinite depth of consciousness that it would be foolish to think that any one person, their experience would be a map or chart for other people's experiences. So I just I begin my position is to be very interested in other people's experiences in a very non judgmental and supportive way. So whatever I say here, please take it in that context. Uh, when we experience realities that are beyond us or consciousness dimensions of consciousness that are beyond our own, and when we're tapping into those qualities that are like infinite compassion and infinite intelligence and infinite creativity, these are qualities that we tend to associate historically with various deities, and it's not surprising that our mind would put together the qualities of the phenomenology of the experience with the qualities of the deities which we may or May may have had experience exposure to intellectually and sometimes we counter deities that we haven't they're not part of our own personal lineage and may not have been part of our they may not have been something even that we knew about. It comes completely out of left field, and yet it bears the form of a culture's form of this deity like Ganesh or Jesus or Mary or the Prophet Muhammad or something like that. So my understanding of it is that when you are working or when you are engaging, entities or forms that have this quality of an entity that is identifiable in our historical traditions, my sense is that we are engaging a collective thought form, or a spiritual being that is wearing the clothes of a collective thought form. And by collective thought form, I mean if you have millions and millions of devotees that meditate and pray and offer devotions to a particular deity, form which has been identified in their scripture, which is painted in their culture, statuary is all of this form. If you have millions and millions and millions of being over 1000s of years, in devotional attachment to these forms, or devotional focus on these forms, I think it creates a certain structure in the collective psyche, a collective thought form. And I don't minimize those forms, I think they're extraordinarily powerful, including secular thought forms like greed, power, anger, those you know, very powerful in our system. So when we encounter the deity in a or a deity in a particular form, we are either encountering a spiritual principle which is beyond form, which is wearing the form of this collective garment, or we're experiencing the collective garment straight out in itself. Either way, the collective psyche is implicated. The collective psyche is part of our experience, which is all perfectly normal and perfectly well and good. I think at the same time, I would hold out that it is possible to go beyond all collective thought forms and to go beyond human history in one's experience, and when one does, those forms tend to fade away. I know there's a lot of discussion of entities, because particularly DMT and DMT derivatives often expose people to entities. And I'm not suggesting that those entities aren't real or the entities don't exist, but to me, personally, and again, limitations, but personally, those entities reflect different levels of reality, that as you go deeper those level that that kind of granular quality of lots of individual beings tends to yield to levels of reality which are less granular, fewer individual beings, kind of constituting the population of those levels of reality and opening up into vast tracks of consciousness which are less individual, less entity, like at least it is, in my experience,

Luc Briede-Cooper  24:22  
got it awesome? Totally, yeah, that definitely seems to resonate in terms of it being sort of a matter of levels, and after seeing sort of where you go in those levels, it makes a lot more sense that at some point even those dissolve and become something different. So speaking of levels, you mentioned that there's sort of a transition that you make, and relatively quickly, I think you said two years for a young person, maybe that's a lot, and that one of the transitions that happens is a sense of. The Journey, sort of being about yourself, to being to be about the individual, to being about the collective. And you speak about Well, I'll let you speak about it. And part of that transition, certain things became obvious to you, and one of those being the sort of fact of reincarnation and past lives. And I'm curious, could you let us know, sort of what the different levels were and how your experience changed as you went up or deeper into them?

Chris Bache  25:30  
All right? Those are sort of two questions rolled into one. So let me take the one on reincarnation first and then bring me back. If I don't come back to the first question, bring me back to it. Got it when I finished graduate school and was beginning my academic life. Two people's work changed my life. One was Stan Grof, and that's what we're talking about today. The other person whose work changed my life was Ian Stevenson, professor at the University of Virginia, who is the Charles Darwin of reincarnation. He basically has generated the data. He's tracked down the data small children who have spontaneous recall of their former lives in sufficient detail and that we can basically exclude natural or physical explanations for how they would have these memories, and he's done this in book after book after book. So Stevenson convinced me that reincarnation was a fact of life, and he convinced me before I was really very deeply involved in my psychedelic work, but that concept was affirmed and expounded and deepened as my psychedelic work deepened. So it was already part of my intellectual furniture, but it just I began to understand it more and more deeply as we went now, in terms of levels. Again, I was working at very high dose levels. So you can count it in terms of years, or you can count it in terms of sessions. It took me about 10 sessions to go through what Stan calls the perinatal level of consciousness, which is that level of consciousness which is right at the interface between personal consciousness and Transpersonal consciousness, where they overlap is this level, which is at the one hand, the basement of the personal psyche and the doorway into spiritual reality. So that one goes through many experiences of death, experiences of sometimes reliving your own birth, confronting all your anxiety about whether there's anything good in reality beyond physical existence, tremendous existential pain, quandary, and eventually this culminates in ego, death. And so the ego is shattered, and you're transcended. You move into levels of consciousness that go considerably beyond anything that could be explained in terms of your personal history. It was at that point when I was expecting actually to be get granted, more comfortable access to spiritual reality, what I found was that the entire Death-Rebirth cycle repeated itself again, but this time at a completely different level. I began to have tremendous collective experiences, experiencing collective rage, collective anguish for a long this went on for another two years and another 10 or so sessions to another 12 sessions. In the beginning, I thought this was simply another variation, a deepening, of ego death. I was still thinking in terms of a personal model. I thought that somehow this collective ego death, this collective death, represented a deepening of my personal death. But in time, it went on for so long and it lasted for it was so the content of the experiences was so inherently connect collective that eventually I came to a different conclusion, and that is the conclusion I came to, is that the patient in these sessions wasn't me personally, but in some way, the patient had become my human family, the collective species of humanity, and that I was being drawn into collective Coex systems that held the pain and suffering of human history, that just as my individual psyche collects my individual trauma in Coex systems, the memory of our species collects its collective trauma. Lama in these vast collective COIC systems that I call them meta matrices, so that eventually what I came to understand took me a long time, because this was so paradigm breaking, and it was so foreign to and it sounded so arrogant, that somehow something I was doing in my sessions was somehow impacting the the psyche of humanity. Mean, my God, that just looks like megalomania. But it's not that. It's simply following the natural course of the deepening of the Death-Rebirth cycle, so that it churns at the personal level, and in my case, then it churned at the collective level for another two years, and eventually it culminated in this orgy of of pain and suffering, of the ocean of suffering. And then it spun me into archetypal reality, and it the collective the ocean of suffering never returned after that point, it just stopped. There were still very intense purification processes to come, but this particular quality of collect, this collective ordeal, stopped, and I went into a whole nother cycle of death and rebirth. So yeah, that's basically the the driving force behind my book, dark night, early dawn, is basically to understand the relationship, or why, why these collective experiences were showing up in my therapy. When I thought I was individual therapy, what were all these people doing in my therapy? Turns out it wasn't that at all.

Luc Briede-Cooper  31:50  
Right, that's funny. Oh, and also, for people who don't know, Coex system is termed from Stani Grof and is sort of the collection of biographical traumas, going down to perinatal traumas around birth, and then going deeper in the Transpersonal in that stack of that pattern, stack with a similar feeling tone, is a Coex. So then the meta coexist, interesting concept.

Chris Bache  32:16  
Thank you for the clarification a system of condensed experience, an aggregate that's compiled of many experiences and memories and fantasies around a particular theme, around an in the individual so meta matrices suggest that the same dynamic happens at the collective level.

Luc Briede-Cooper  32:34  
Yeah, got it. Do you relate that to the idea of ancestral healing? Or maybe that's different, actually, than sort of like family trauma,

Chris Bache  32:44  
interesting, uh, variations on a theme, aren't they? Both of them are trans individual, ancestral still is working within the lineage of the individual, some type of biographical lineage, right? Whereas, I tend to focus, I mean, I haven't done a lot of work with ancestors in the work that I've done, so I don't want to presume to be able to speak on that area. For me very we very quickly I go into the soul, reality. And the soul, of course, jumps historical lineages all over the place the soul is. We've been every race, we've been every culture, we've been every occupation that's available through history. So to me, it broadens out very quickly into the human story, the human family. But other people have had an experience of working with their personal trauma, ancestral trauma, you know, in that kind of directed, linear fashion. And so, yeah, I think there, there should be some relationship between what I experience as these meta matrices of human trauma and what other people experience as ancestral trauma gatherings at an ancestral level.

Luc Briede-Cooper  34:06  
Yeah. I wonder if maybe the difference is so the soul capital S, soul being the collection of your experiences, of your awareness across multiple past, all your past, reincarnated lifetimes. I wonder if maybe the it speaks to a differentiation between like biological trauma and passed down, also socially passed down from parent to child. Maybe that's sort of where that comes from. And then the soul is like a different thing. I don't know. Does that resonate with you?

Chris Bache  34:31  
Potentially, here it does. And I think one day we will understand this much more. I mean, we basically are right at the edge. We're collecting the phenomenology the experiences, but actually interpreting this complex, new complex of experiences is going to take some time.

Luc Briede-Cooper  34:50  
Yeah, got it totally right. Interesting question. So you mentioned species mind and coming into this call. Ocean of suffering, of collective pain. Where do animals fit into this?

Chris Bache  35:06  
Yeah, well, of course, many psychedelics have very powerful experiences with animal species, with the various totems of various species. They have powerful experiences of the planet filled with the minds of these species, not just the individual species, but the minds of these species and aggregates of mammalian mind and so on so forth. That hasn't been the thrust of my experience. The thrust of my experience has really been working with human consciousness, but the nature of my experience of human consciousness completely opens me to the reality of animal consciousness in all sorts of different forms. I think the reason I've been focused on human consciousness, for reasons not of my choosing, just count being driven at a deeper level, is that humanity represents the greatest danger to life on this planet. We are the We Are The Life destroyers. We are the driving force of the Sixth Extinction. If we can heal humanity, then all the other animals, all the other mammals and life forms on the planet, will be safe. And that has been the focus of my work. Seems to have been vocally focused on that human story. Other people have been retrieving the consciousness story of other life forms, even rock life forms and insect life forms and animal life forms, bird, fish life forms, absolutely important work, essential work, it just hasn't been my personal work.

Luc Briede-Cooper  36:57  
Yeah, got it? Yeah. It's very interesting, and maybe it's that I read this book, levels of energy by David Hawkins. I don't familiar with it, but basic point is, he uses a method to, in his framework, identify a number to the level of consciousness, or the level of energy of a being or an object or a mineral or whatever, and he and interesting enough, like a bacteria, lands on the scale somewhere they're very low three or something I don't know, and I don't know what might come first is the acknowledgement of the consciousness of, say, animals and working our way down, or the acknowledgement of, say, consciousness above us. But it seems either way, it sort of they, they, yeah, make the other aware, something like that.

Chris Bache  37:50  
Let's imagine that there are as as many levels of consciousness as there are, quote, below us, simpler and simpler and simpler, you know, moving all the way down through the evolutionary tree. Imagine that there are that many levels of consciousness above us, and that we're not, in any way, the top of the chain, but we're maybe somewhere in the midpoint of that chain totally.

Luc Briede-Cooper  38:16  
And an image comes to mind of, I think you mentioned at the end of the book of the idea that an ascension of us in consciousness is sort of like a pulling down of something from a higher level. And I thought, Oh, hey, how does that work? For like, like, our our tissue cells, like, if they they're sort of reliant on us in some way, and we're also reliant on them, and there's this, like, bottom up, top down relationship, but so I'd love to ask you speaking about levels again, I think we touched on breaking through to archetypal what you the best language you could find being archetypal reality, and something you mentioned experiencing at that Jump was a shift in your sense of the realness of everyday, ordinary life and ordinary states of consciousness. I'm curious. Did Did your sense of reality change continuously? Did it change in certain jumps, or maybe just that one jump? And how did your sense of reality shift?

Chris Bache  39:17  
My sense of reality changed repeatedly at different levels, when everything was said and done, when I was processing all the experiences and trying to organize them in some form, to present them and share them with other people, I differentiated five different levels, core levels of consciousness, personal mind, collective mind, archetypal mind, causal oneness, so the causal mind and then diamond Luminosity overlapping levels, and it's somewhat arbitrary where you draw the lines, but basically those divisions so that the jump from personal. Consciousness into collective reality was a significant jump into it's like, this is how reality is organized at a higher altitude, right? And then when that culminated and I was spun into reality, into arc, what I called archetype of reality, this was a quantum step into a still deeper modality of consciousness. And in this, one of the striking features was I repeatedly had the sense over this next year and a half of work that I had entered a reality that was more real than time and space, and I was dealing with phenomena that were more real than my personal existence inside time and space, or even time space itself. And this, of course, touches on an ancient idea that we trace back to Plato, that there are structures. He called them archetypes. There are arche structures that in create and inform time, space, reality, all right. And he conceived these structures as eternal ideas in the mind of an eternal unchanging ideas in the mind of an eternal Deity, an eternal Divine Principle. That's not how I experience them. I experience them as living entities, as moving in time, but on a completely different scale of time. So an analogy that came up in my sessions, if you think of the earth spinning around real quickly, and then spinning around the Sun pretty quickly, but then you look at that in the context of the galaxy, which is moving incredibly slowly, but vast. It's always moving. And inside you have the sun moving. It's kind of like that archetypal reality. These archetypal beings, to the extent that I was able to experience them clearly at all, were vast living structures on a completely different order of causality, in a different order of time. I could not I could not wrap my mind around them. I could not see them cognitively coherently. I experienced this enormous living intelligences and the best my mind could do to give them some type of representation was to see them, ask galaxies. So we've all looked at the Hubble telescopes. We've all looked at these galaxies. We've seen the pictures we if we really sit with them and meditate them, we understand more deeply what we're looking at and these things are billions of light years across, containing billions and billions of stars and so on so forth. That's what my mind did, just to frame this experience in some way. But I could not penetrate beyond that. They were just too big and too foreign to me to give them form. At a lower level of archetype reality, I entered what I would call sort of a Jungian level of archetype reality, where I experienced repeatedly the human psyche and the human species as a single organism, a single integrated organism. And I experienced networks, physical and mental networks connecting this organism, kind of like the neurology of this organism. And I was shown repeatedly how the individual is hardwired and soft, wired into this matrix of consciousness of the species mind and the species mind how it informs our individual consciousness, and how our individual consciousness reaches out and informs and structures future species consciousness. So I saw things like each one of us carry a holographic, fractal piece of the diseases of our time, of the mental diseases, of the physical diseases, and as we heal ourselves of these mental and physical diseases, we actually contribute to the healing of the collective psyche. So the collective psyche, in a sense, you would say it's more real than the individual psyche, but I would give it maybe a little different vocabulary. The individual is real, the collective is real. They have different kind of scales of their reality, and they are mutually implicated in each other, and both of these are transcended by the platonic, archetypal levels of reality, which are radically beyond our human. Collective psyche, yeah, perfectly understood, yeah. From that point on, from archetypal reality and beyond, everything was about going into deeper and deeper levels of what is real in the world. And we're not used to thinking of physical reality being on surface real, and that there are structures that are more deeply real. But I think that quantum theory is comfortable with that. String theorists are comfortable with that we should be able to be comfortable with that in psychology.

Luc Briede-Cooper  45:36  
Got it? Yeah, I was just going to say perfectly understood. Can visualize it perfectly, understand completely. But there's something really intuitive about it that resonates. And actually, people do have experiences of a sense of degree of reality sometimes. So just sticking to the reality point, just for a minute, there's, I don't know if you ever heard of this, but there's this condition called depersonalization, de realization disorder. Now, as a disorder, it's relatively rare, but the experience of de realization is something that that, I think, something like, upwards, more than 50% of people at some point in their life experience at least a moment or something of de realization. And that dpdr, the acronym is, of course, a like a DSM mental illness. There's also the condition schizophrenia, which has some kind of interesting relationship to mystical visions that Carl Jung noted, and at least psychedelics themselves can induce or worsen schizophrenic cysts, symptoms and the visions that people might have in schizophrenia can overlap with sort of the visions people might have with psychedelic stuff. So there's a there's a connection there between there's some kind of connection there. I'm just curious if your sense of just bouncing off those, if your sense of mental illness has changed after your journeys.

Chris Bache  46:59  
Well, that's a complicated topic, isn't it? And better answered by someone with psychedelic experience who is a clinical psychologist or a psychiatrist, who has much more training than I do in pathology and in our psychological makeup, it has changed some was it Huston Smith who said a mystic learns to swim in waters that the psychotic drowns

Luc Briede-Cooper  47:28  
in? I think that was Joseph Campbell, I believe, yeah, yeah.

Chris Bache  47:33  
So what's what we have in common is opening up into a reality that is beyond the private reality or the personal reality, we open up to a larger expanse of reality, which can be very destructive if you're not ready for it. It can be very injurious. It can be very traumatic. It can be very tumultuous. It can churn things up inside of you, just opening up to collective dimensions. And that's why I really like all psychedelic therapists, I emphasize the importance of accessing these dimensions and very carefully controlled circumstances with therapeutic support. You know, when you go into them, and this is work that's not not advisable for a wide range of people. I mean, this is not necessarily, it's not universally safe. It really depends upon a lot of variables. There are screening criteria which have been developed to help screen people who are good candidates for working with psychedelics and those who aren't. Nothing unusual here. It's just part of the regimen. I'm less interested in trying to refine my understanding of disease and pathology, other than in very broad senses, understanding that people can be having legitimate access to Transpersonal reality, but in a way which is fractures or injures their ordinary their ability to function in the ordinary world. What I'm more interested in is differentiating those confusions, those kind of lower level confusions between individual experience and these larger planes of reality from those breakthroughs where we begin to enter these larger horizons, but either because our original equipment was sufficiently strong or because our methodology is sufficiently rigorous and focused. We don't experience it as traumatic. We don't experience it as confusion, confusing. We experience it as clarifying, and not the clarifying of an illusion or a delusion, but truly, truly, metaphysically clarifying, so that these be. Become great spiritual and philosophical initiations into the deeper fabric of reality, the sensation of that experience, I think, is very different than the kind of tumultuous confusion that can be generated in a in a pathological context, yeah.

Luc Briede-Cooper  50:25  
Got it totally Yeah, and yeah, when you get to the collective level, then it becomes something very different. So that's so thank you for that. You mentioned the sort of five levels that you lay out that there's the personal, the collective, the archetypal, the causal oneness and the diamond Luminosity. And just curious, if you could take us up through to those levels. I know in another interview, you said you hate that question, because it's so challenging to talk about. I don't press you too hard.

Chris Bache  51:01  
We've gone into archetype of reality with the collective dimension. And that, in my experience, what happened was, after about a year and a half, which is 1112, sessions, not very much time. I mean, it really wasn't a lot of time, because this is a reality. Archetype of reality is so vast, it's so huge, that I basically kind of went through it very quickly, not experiencing the breadth of it, but just penetrating through it pretty quickly, and then entering going through yet another death and rebirth, kind of dying out of the greater real into an even greater, greater real this letting go of another level of set of assumptions and entering into a year of tremendously powerful experiences, which I kind of grouped together into this category of causal oneness, because that when you when you first enter Transpersonal states of awareness or first enter spiritual levels of reality, our experiences there are highly conditioned by our Time space experience, so that in time and space, we all exist as separate individuals. So when you move into spiritual reality, you often tend to experience spiritual reality as composed of separate individuals, but they're without a body. They're just but they have that granular quality of individual psyches or individual souls or individual entities. If you go deeper into from psychic level to subtle level of reality, using Stan Grof categories, the units of consciousness become larger, you're still in levels of consciousness which are dualistic in the sense is more than one of you present. But the cons, the the entities are become increasingly large, so that it becomes species consciousness, or earth consciousness, are angelic realms, they become just very, very large. So you move from a level of consciousness, such as highly conditioned by time, space consciousness, into a deeper level of consciousness, which is less conditioned by time, space consciousness. And then when you move into causal level reality. The distinctive quality of that is that the entire universe is experienced as a single organism. Now there oneness is a core, core truth, of course, and it it manifests at many different levels. I don't mean to over differentiate, you know, these levels and suggest that it's a it's literally climbing a ladder of consciousness. But my experience is basically unfolded in this kind of fashion. When you experience the world as one, it's it's not like experience intuiting the oneness of life. So that's part of it, but you literally dissolve into the universe as it appears to be experiencing itself, and as the universe experiences itself at that level, there are no separate objects. There are separate there are gradations and differentiations, but all of those start taking place within the tapestry, within the matrix of oneness. And that's what I mean by causal oneness, that I entered into a reality that I experienced as being, in some ways, beyond the archetype, beyond those divisions in which I experienced the world as a sea. Painless fabric of reality and all other realities, Star realities, Galaxy realities, personal consciousness realities, collective psyche realities, all took place as organs within this larger oneness. In that context, I had experiences of deep experiences of what the Buddhist call Shunyata, emptiness, emptiness of form, transparency, where the experience, the way it's put in Buddhist scriptures, the Buddha awoke, you know, in his meditation and saw self, no self in himself, and no self anywhere in the world. So the way we usually experience the world is composed of separate entities, and we are one of those entities. But when you experience the world in the causal perspective, you don't experience yourself as a separate self, and you don't experience a separate self anywhere in the world. Now, what is the world if there's no separate self in it, no separate molecules, no separate trees, no separate life forms, it is a living, thriving singularity, a oneness and a one organism. So there were experiences of that. There were experiences of cosmic love. And love, of course, is the, in a sense, the emotion of oneness. When we experience love, we are experiencing the emotional counterpart to the fact of oneness, experiences of the void, the primal void out of which the universe arises in the Big Bang. And experiences for part of me at this period was the birth of the diamond soul, which was a long lesson where reincarnation is taking humanity, where is this singular consciousness taking this little bitty species on this little bitty planet in this little bitty solar system. That's what I mean by calls a reality, the fundamental, a deep, deep encounter with the oneness of life. And then for me, after about a year and a half at that level, I went through yet another Death-Rebirth process, which is, it's not ego death again, it's it's not collective ego death. It's a deeper layer of dying and being reborn. And I was brought into states of consciousness, which I experienced as being hyper, hyper, hyper, hyper, Crystal, clear, clear, beyond imagination, just clear. Experiences of light, but I had known light, you know, many times up to this point, but this was an exceptionally clear form of light, Mark, just striking. I know I'm saying the same word over and over again, but that was the quality. It's like my ordinary mind felt gauzy and shadowy compared to this, even collective mind and even archetypal mind felt like shadows compared to this, which was clear beyond imagination. Over the next four years, I entered this state only four times. So in 26 sessions, I entered this reality only four times during in between those real in between those four sessions, lots of episodes of cleansing, lots of episodes of healing and purification. Purification, because if you're going to maintain clear cognition at these deeper levels of consciousness, you must go through a purification process that allows your entire system to acclimate to the levels of energy and the levels of reality that you're entering and so it's it's just a natural course that I've discovered that every time I entered into a deeper level of reality, I was entering into a higher level of energy, and so I had to go through this purification process, otherwise my experience at this new level would not be clear. It would not be I would not be able to remember my experiences clearly, and you literally have to train yourself. I know this a little off the point, but you have to train yourself to maintain cognitive coherence in these deeper levels of reality. Otherwise, you may get glancing insights, or, you know, short glimpses here and there, short touches. But your mind in order to truly stay that this reality for hours and hours at a time, you have to go through this deep, transformational process. So for me, I went into the diamond Luminosity and went deeper into it for two of these four sessions, and then things. Changed. I had a particular experience, and from that point on, things changed. I wasn't going deeper into diamond Luminosity. The diamond Luminosity was crunching itself more and more deeply into my physical body, into my mental body, into my psychological and emotional body. And then I had one last, what I consider one of the last big visions of my entire journey, and then it was wrapped up two more sessions, the universe has kind of wrapped it up, and said, sayonara, since see you so

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:00:38  
Wow, amazing. And the breath of life, the expansion, the contraction. You see that in your journey, it's everywhere. And one of the two thoughts, one of the striking things that I took away from the book personally, was the shift in understanding of ineffability, and that different levels being hard to find language for is a matter of stabilizing and familiarity and not necessarily a complete inherent lack of understanding that. So that's one takeaway, and then the other one, maybe even a bigger one. I just opened up a page to the book here, where you mention it is one small little section called Beyond the diamond Luminosity and the humor of the failure of language, you know, going from clarity beyond clarity to all capitals, hyper clarity and beyond the light of all light, better than more light than the other light, going to absolute light. And you're understanding that this points to there being more than just there, being like infinite number of levels, potentially as being the takeaway from that.

Chris Bache  1:01:49  
Let me say something about that, because it does it that did represent as major turning point for me. So setting the stage. I'm now 15 years into this journey, I've gone through the ocean of suffering. I've gone through ego death. I've gone through archetype of reality. I've gone through lots of experiences of causal of reality, and then i i get dropped into this communion with this infinitely satisfying, clear diamond Luminosity, what Buddhism calls Dharmakaya, the clear light of absolute reality. So I get back into that the second time, which is the 50th session. Second time I'm in that reality. I'm as deep into the universe as I've ever been before, I couldn't ask for anything more than I was being given at the time. And all of a sudden, my visual field pivoted 90 degrees, and I saw reality Far, Far in the distance. Again, it looked kind of like galaxies. And out of that reality, a beam of light came and hit me, and it absolutely shattered me. It just it was a more powerful light than even the diamond Luminosity that had become my ultimate reality, and just in that one second, it completely changed my understanding of reality in that I had adopted the belief from multiple sources that there was an end point to this work. You know, you want to get to the goal. You do this become one with God, or to dissolve into the void, the primal void of all existence. And I had become one with God in many different variations, and I had entered the primal void, but I I still had this sense that there was an end point to this journey, and I was pushing so hard to get to the end point. I don't know what was I was expecting to be waiting for me at the end point, but I knew it was going to be good. And what this session showed me was that it is an infinite universe I'll never get to the end of it. It's just too vast, too huge. And it's 50 sessions in, 50 high dose sessions in and I was shown this glimpse of a reality far, far beyond anything that I would reach in this lifetime. And at that point, I let go completely of the idea of reaching a deeper or an end point reality, and it changed into trying to absorb the reality that I was being opened into as deeply as I could, into my into my personal being. So yeah, that was a major turning point, and that's one of the reasons I would if I were doing this over again, I would be gentler with myself, because one of the reasons I was pushing so hard was because I had adopted a false belief. There is an end point. Now I should be careful. There are homecomings. You go through experiences of coming home, and there's a tremendous sense of return and tremendous sense of ecstasy and joy of Homecoming. But even those, I don't think they are not ultimate. At least they're not. In my experience, they are. They're markers on longer journey. And that's why I would be gentle. I would have a different orientation for what the purpose or what the value of these exercises are

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:05:36  
totally, totally and I think my shift in understanding through the book too. Also, that one paragraph changed everything for me in similar way. I thought, yeah, I want to reach the end point too. And then that changed that so. So I guess following that thread, coming back down the mountain, as you've gone through these experiences, you had a vision of the future and of the of what may be coming in the future. And could you tell us about what that was like, what that looked like, and how that's evolved for you since, I know, since you published the book, The covid pandemic happened.

Chris Bache  1:06:19  
Yeah. Well, this is not so much coming down the mountain, but still climbing the mountain. It actually started when I was in the end stages of the ocean of suffering work. When I was in the chapter the initiation of the universe, I started being given visionary initiations into the human story and the stages of human evolution, and in particular, the story that I was being initiated into was the story that humanity was coming to a turning point in its evolutionary development. It was coming to a major transformative pivot that would change the nature of life on this planet. And I just had a series of visions over four years in the early to mid 1990s of what I call the visions of awakening, was that the that there was an historical process that was trying to awaken not just individuals. It was trying to awaken the entire species. That was the historical work at hand, a transformation that was truly collective, a transformation not simply of our psychological well being or some levels of psychological truth, but a transformation of the fundamental plate tectonics of the art of the collective psyche, the archetypal structure of the deep psyche, was in the process of undergoing a revision, a transition. So this for four years, these visions kept coming into me, and this completely surprised me, because, again, I was at the tail end of thinking this. My work was about personal transformation, and yet these visions were consistently about collective transformation. Nowhere was I shown how nature was going to pull off this transformation nature, or divine, or whatever you think of it's the driving force. How are we going to undergo this profound transition that I was being shown? And then in 1995 when I was in the middle of the diamond Luminosity work, and I had entered the diamond Luminosity twice, and it had that experience we just talked about, I'd done a year's worth of more purification, and I was expecting, given the rhythms of what had gone on before, I was expecting to be taken back into the diamond Luminosity material again. But that's not what happened. What happened was, first I dissolved radically into the species mind. I'd gone into that territory before I had learned how to go through this process. So I dissolved into the mind of our species, and I ceased to function as Chris Bache and I began to function in somehow. I know this sounds extreme, but in somehow, I was functioning as the species of humanity. At some core level, I had become the human species. And then I was also I was taken deep into deep time. I'd gone into deep time many times previously. This took me deeper into deep time than I had gone before. And basically in that session, I experienced the death and rebirth of humanity. I experienced a global crisis that we were coming into, and I experienced it at. Species will experience it. It didn't give me the details. It didn't tell me when, where, how, exactly it told me. It showed me the fact of this crisis. It showed me that we would make it through this crisis, and it gave me certain key insights in how of the mechanisms of transformation that were involved in this crisis, but basically what I experienced in this session was humanity coming to a turning point in its history and a profound unraveling, a deep de construction of reality as we had known it, an undoing of all the assumptions that we were making, it seemed as if this was a global systems crisis that was being driven by a series of ecological crises at the time. I should say this is 25 years ago, right? I didn't know. I knew next to nothing about the global systems crisis. I didn't know about ecological crises. I didn't you know this was I was totally naive about these things. But what I experienced was humanity came to a point where we basically lost control of our lives. We were not able to control the reality of our lives. We basically were on an extinction trajectory, and just when it reached its peak, we went through a threshold, and the danger began to subside, and we began to, as it were, pick ourselves up on the other side of this years, decades, long series of crises, and when we picked ourselves up and when we began to reorganize ourselves after this crisis, we found that we had been profoundly and deeply and permanently changed by this crisis we had, it led to we were changed at the core level of our essential psyche, of our of our collective psyche. This crisis opened up our heart to one another and opened up our mind to the universe in a way that was collectively unprecedented, and as we began to interact in this post crisis reality, there was a synergistic feeding off of patterns and trends and feeding back and forth All circulating around new values, new perceptions of the good, new understandings of life, new understandings of ourselves, new understandings of the universe, new capacities that were opening within the human heart and the human mind. Then in the 70th session, one that what I refer to as this last visionary experience. I was taken deeper into deep time and given one last Coda on this trajectory. But the net result of all of this is that I came to see or what I was being shown, was that humanity was in the process of giving birth to its next evolutionary form, to the next higher form of being, a human being. And if you ask, what is the form of the future human? What will the future human look like? I think the key is understanding reincarnation. This refers to another series of lessons that I was given where I was shown experientially, personally and experientially, where reincarnation is taking humanity, where are we going? And this was different than the Eastern traditions that I had assimilated in graduate school that that vision is you grow and you grow and you grow and you change. You achieve some type of spiritual breakthrough to your individual essence. You know, Atman is Brahman. We are divine. And when you have that spiritual breakthrough, you achieve what the Hindus call Moksha escape, which means you escape Samsara. You no longer have to be incarnated. You achieve realization, you achieve enlightenment, and then you enter parin nirvana. You leave the physical universe behind. What was paramount in my sessions was not that. It was the vision that we grow and we grow and we change and we grow and hopefully more compassionate, more understanding, more talent, so on, so forth. But there comes a time. Well, the way I understand reincarnation,

Chris Bache  1:14:53  
we die, we expand to our soul consciousness. We make a choice to incarnate. We contract into egoic consciousness. Consciousness, we expand into soul consciousness, come back into egoic consciousness, and we've been doing this for 10s of 1000s, possibly hundreds of 1000s of years. And if we do that, sooner or later, soul consciousness wakes up inside individual historical consciousness. So that my experience was, I had an experience where, at a critical point in one journey, all of my former lives started to come back into me. And I had known I had done, you know, past life therapy. I knew a dozen or so of my former lives in detail, but all of my former lives started to come back into me, and at one particular point they seemed to reach a critical mass, and they there was an explosion of energy, and this energy fused all those individual lives into a single consciousness, and I was catapulted into a state of consciousness that was individual, but a form of individuality beyond anything that I had ever understood. And I think that's what's happening to us on this planet. We, and we have been gestating the future human for 1000s and 1000s of years. We are about to give birth to that future human in history. In the century, I believe gestation is long, birth is very short, traumatic. I think that we're entering a time of history which is going to be traumatic. It's going to be very painful. It's going to be very difficult, the way labor is difficult, but I believe, based only on my psychedelic experience, that we do make it through, and we are deeply changed in the process. And we grow up. We grow up into our next evolutionary form, the future human. And on those few occasions in my sessions when I was allowed to experience the future human, they were deeply and profoundly ecstatic experiences, just totally humbling and just, you know, just a radically transform humanity coming out of this process. And I think that this chapter, the birth of the future human in the book, is the most important chapter in the book, because it if it's true, it concerns your children, my children, our grandchildren, our grandchildren's grandchildren. It concerns all of us, what's happening at a very, very deep level. And it also helped me understand some of the historical currents that were taking place in this context. Covid is, to me, it's like a little shot across the bow. You know? It's like a little overture. It's not the real symphony. It's just the overture to the symphony. It's just, it's a taste of how vulnerable we are to deep and profound disruption and how quickly the entire structure of our society can pivot. That's what we should have. Should be learning from covid and our interdependence and how much we have to work together to rise to the challenge that's coming at us. The challenges will be much deeper than covid and much longer lasting and much more serious and life threatening, I think.

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:18:36  
Yeah, thank you. Yeah, the vision is very powerful, and I didn't have the vision. I can't speak to it directly, but there are obviously signs of that happening, you know, ecological signs. And I know there's tons of literature on systems crisis and vulnerability, and we see that financially, that's for sure. We've seen that play out when covid happened, one of the things we saw here in Canada was just toilet paper ran out. Everyone was doing the rush for toilet paper. A little hint at what can happen, right? How quickly it can happen. And what comes to mind is the, I think it's Chinese proverb, I don't know. Maybe Einstein said it. Maybe something, it was something like, you know, society will be good, or the world will be happy when people are willing to plant trees that will only be seen by the next generation. So the idea that it seemed so intuitive, something clicked when he said about the souls fusing together, about being able to understand and see that we'll have reincarnations in the future, and so we'll actually be on this planet when we die again. So something very intuitive

Chris Bache  1:19:46  
change, isn't it? Yeah, American traditions of making your decisions based upon how they impact seven generations, recognizing that we will be those generations. So the earth we leave is the earth we inherit. Spirit, and it just it broadens our sense of responsibility. And grant Ellison says this, basically, we have to move from being a species stuck at the adolescent level to the mature adult level. And when you're at the mature adult level, you you look at the broader impact across society and through history, of the decisions and the choices that you're making. And my sense is we no longer can afford to try to run this planet based on egoic consciousness. The culture that we have created, the history that we have lived, is a history that has been created by the ego. Now, I know the ego gets a bad rap in spiritual traditions, and I think the ego is beautiful to me. It's an exquisitely beautiful structure of consciousness, but it's fundamentally isolated. It doesn't really experience the deeper fabric of our connective tissue we can no longer afford to run this planet by or have this planet run by human beings who are operating only out of an egoic level of consciousness, because that inevitably creates push pull, that creates wars. It creates upper classes and lower classes, those who have and those who don't, the privileged and the unprivileged. We need to grow up. And we need to basically grow up into our soul consciousness, knowing that now our soul ahead, we have experienced lives as all the races on the planet, all the nations on the planet, all the classes on the planet, all of those are alive within us and making our choices out of that level of consciousness?

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:21:44  
Yeah, can only imagine what that would be like. So I've, I've got something for you, Chris, I've got a gift for you, because that when you you share the vision in the book, I'll just read it, you say, I saw the future human standing up, and this seems significant against the background of many seated Buddhas, this being was standing upright. So you mentioned that your form of art is writing, and that's beautiful. Some people, they use visual art, like Carl Jung, for visualizing their visions. Well, one tool that we have available to us now is the tool of AI art, where you can put in prompts and receive images and things. So I just emailed to you just right now, I just hit send an AI art image I generated. Of that image as best as I could represent it.

Chris Bache  1:22:39  
I see it, yeah, I see it. That's beautiful. That's beautiful. Yeah. So my sense is that in history, we've hit basically the meditating Buddha. The meditating Buddha, or any meditating being in an awakened condition, gets quiet and quiet on the outside in order to still the mind, so the mind can penetrate through the layers and touch the deeper sense of reality. And a standing Buddha is someone who incorporates the clarity of that sitting monster, but the dynamism of standing and walking and acting. And I think that's that's where we're going. It's not about simply awaking up. It's a waking up and acting on that awakened consciousness and bring it forward. Thank you for that image. That's really beautiful.

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:23:36  
Yeah, awesome. Yeah. It's a very large scaled one, so feel free to do whatever you want with it. Yeah, awesome. So awesome. So we're shifting more so I've there. I've got some specific things I want to ask you about two and a half. I'm glad that we've covered all this so far, because now it contextualizes it. I'm very interested in I love that it's sort of bringing back those, those concepts and experiences, back down to here and now, like on earth at this level of consciousness and operating here. And some of the things that we contend with here are the reality of needing to operate in the world that we have sort of traditions from the past that we have handed down to us. Edward was born in in this life, and we see that there are religions that we can certain paths that we can follow, and there's certain deities that can be worshiped, and there are many choices in how to how to navigate this world. And that's been a very strong question for me personally, at least, and how do I want to walk in life? Now, I guess maybe the first question is, so how is your understanding of God and religion change through your journeys, and how might that relate to the lack of one ultimate level and meta coexistence?

Chris Bache  1:24:53  
That's a big question. Yeah, that question. I need to drink some water. Yeah. Yeah. Well, you know, I was a religious studies professor, and I started, I mean, I, my first vocation in life was my, I wanted to be a Catholic priest. I was raised in the Roman Catholic tradition, and I was in the seminary for four years, and the Catholic tradition treated me well. I didn't get any trauma. And it was, you know, it was a good shake, but, and then I did my masters. I did a degree, undergraduate degree in Theology at Notre Dame, and then I did a master's in New Testament criticism at Cambridge. And then I did philosophy religion at Brown and by the time I finished graduate school, I had pretty much studied my way out of religion altogether. I kind of had recapitulated the transition from medieval theology in the Catholic tradition to the scriptural Revelation, the scriptural revolution in Protestantism to the scientific critique of religion in the modern mind. And basically, I finished essay pretty sophisticated agnostic with very high standards for any possibility of conceptualizing beyond something beyond time and space, something approximating God's dimensions. So I had let go of concepts of God I and I, since I had studied not just one religious tradition, but I had studied multiple religious traditions, I began to understand the common threads, but also the differences in the world religions. And I also studied how religions came into existence, and they say that dogma is like sausage. You really don't want to see it made. And when you really watch how dogma is created historically, it's so filled with human errors and human foibles that you just don't want to eat that kind of stuff. So I had gone through that, and I pretty much had scrubbed my mind of all things having to do with theology and deities and things like that. And that's that was the mind that I started the psychedelic work. And what happened was, of course, the psychedelic work initiated me into the reality that was behind those concepts, and it took me into the spiritual reality that had given birth to these approximations through history, but it took me into it. On the one hand, it led me to affirm the reality of the deeper intelligence that lies behind the physical existence, but it did not lead me to to affirm any individual lineage of deity or teachers and even collectively. The nature of my experience was to transcend even the collective religious enterprise so that it entered it drew me into the reality, a reality of the Divine, which is so far beyond our historical attempts to conceptualize the divine in history that truly, you know, we say I'm spiritual, not religious. It's that's a trope I know, but it's kind of like that. I did not relate, and I do not relate in any devotional sense, to any of the religions on the planet, while I respect them enormously, and I understand them and I respect the polishing that they can give human nature. My psychedelic experiences took me in a world beyond that world. So on the one hand, I I affirm a divine intelligence, while I don't like the word divine, and that's why I talk about the mind of the universe, because I'd rather speak in those categories than in theological categories, but that there is an extraordinary Infinite Intelligence and infinite compassion that gives birth to existence and that embodies that the physical universe is the body of this being, of this manifest being, and there might be other universes. And you know, our universe is not necessarily the only universe in existence, but there are other universes with all the levels and complexities that ours has. So it's, it's, it's a complex answer, isn't it? It, on the one hand, it affirms a spiritual reality. It affirms divine reality. And I also don't feel. People inclined to narrow my love of this intelligence to any historical religious forms.

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:30:12  
Got it very tough topic, 100% and I definitely see the hesitation to or not hesitation, the very clear sense of not wanting to start your own thing, bacheism, the psychedelic path, what a was doing that. And so there it's interesting, one hand, people speak about the meaning crisis that we face in the West, that scientific materialism is sort of gras hold, and we've completely wiped out any higher realms from our sense of reality, and in, you know, the coming just challenges that we're going to face, if that culminates in a, in a in a global crisis, as you describe, or otherwise that we have to contend with the world and we need to navigate in the world and a sense of meaning and purpose and self understanding as part of that leading up to this future human we have decisions and actions that we can take as individuals, and not everyone can. Can walk the psychedelic path to necessarily realize these things themselves. How do you see people preparing themselves or moving forward in light of this understanding of the Great Awakening?

Chris Bache  1:31:24  
Well, you're absolutely right. We are living in a time of a crisis of meaning because the materialism of early science, not post quantum science, but of early science, which still tends to dominate humanities and the social sciences. Is a world that's stripped of meaning. It's a world that has no meaning, and there is nothing beyond physical reality, and physical reality is seen as evolving by pure chance. So there's no existential significance your life has no meaning associated with it. There is no existential significance to the challenges that you may be facing psychologically or physically or socially. It's just pure, random. Nature is blind, it's violent. And I all my life, I've been working with students at university campuses, and that's the philosophy that they've been taught in all their other courses. You know, that reality to be real, you have to face the meaninglessness of existence, and then you push on from there. That is one of the great values of psychedelics, because that psychedelics can pop that bubble. You know, it doesn't take too long to pop that bubble. You know, give me one weekend a month for one year, and we can pretty much shatter that so at least we can see that there is a reality that's behind the physical universe we can experience, to some degree, the intelligence of design that is expressing itself in The creative manifestation of time and space, and the structures in time and space, that's a very powerful breakthrough. I think that's one of the major contributions that psychedelics can make for us. Is not simply healing us of our trauma and healing us of our wounds, but initiating us, initiating us into this, on the one hand, ancient and on the other hand, new world view that the world is alive. The world is saturated with intelligence. And there's layers and layers and layers of intelligence. And we can commune with this intelligence. We can download from this intelligence. We can, you know, enter into it, just to, just to have this sense that there is a purpose to life, there is an intelligence expressing itself. That's one of the reasons why I think reincarnation is so important, because we have hard data that reincarnation is true because, you know, we have those verified memories of our deep past, and that tells us that gives us a deeper understanding of what the what might be driving the things that we undertake in our lifetime, that there is a hidden purpose, a hidden project folded into the details of our life circumstance. This is just one of the things that comes very, very clear in past life therapy by expansion, when we begin to see the purpose, not only in our individual lives, but the purpose that's percolating inside our collective evolution, and the purpose that's behind biological evolution, the emergence of life, the emergence of self aware life, and so on and so forth. That gives us some grounds for beginning to hope that there is meaning behind this crisis that we're coming into, that this crisis is going to be terrible. I mean, it's going to be just terrible. Well, this is not we're not going to get through this easily, and I believe we will survive it, but we will not survive unchanged. We will be deeply changed by it, and to enter into this process with this belief that somehow it's all an accident and it has no meaning, it has no significance. Is a terrible, terrible philosophy to take into what's coming Now, having said that the experience of the meaningfulness of existence or the the intelligence that runs throughout all of life, that doesn't mean necessarily that our first or second or third take on this intelligence is necessarily correct, because there's a sense in which just to touch the enormous scale of creation is a humbling experience, and it tends to lead you to hold on to your concepts lightly, delicately, because you know that your concepts are only small approximations of something which is much, much larger than your mind is going to wrap itself around. But just to have the experience that there is this power manifesting itself in life encourages us, I think, to live our life with deep integrity, to live our life with deep purpose, and to actualize the purpose of our incarnation as deeply as we can. My understanding is that before we incarnate, we choose our incarnation, and there's lots of research that suggests that. So my sense is that every one of us, every human being on the planet now, chose the incarnation that they are currently living, right? And if that's the case, then all we need to do is do is do the best we can with the incarnation that we are living, and the rest will take care of itself, right? And I think that's a pretty healthy way to engage what's coming at us, to do the very best we can and let the end results work themselves out beautiful.

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:37:20  
And of course, immediately begs the question, what is the best that we can do? You know, although there there's something immediate about that, we have things that immediately call us in our in our environment. So there's, there's definitely something else to that. Okay, so I hear what you're saying about attaching ourselves to concepts lightly and at the same time with our practices, or spiritual practices, we may have a stronger hold on those as the process, maybe not attached to the meaning that we attribute to the end goal or things like that. I'd like to explore this a little bit more specifically too. And one of the ways that we can that we confront the world comes to a basic principle, as far as I can understand it, is that where attention goes, energy flows. Is the idea you mentioned earlier, that when we sort of worship or give praise to entities or say, collective principles, that it can kind of give rise to those as images in the collective unconscious. And the way I understand worship is being like a it's like a practice of of directing attention to the highest value, the highest good, some some aim that you have, that you know, whether that's nirvana or whether that's creating the kingdom of God on earth in Christianity, or the Gnostic image of separating from the earth, sort of up and out image that the Gnostics had. What the worship does is it helps people sort of realign their values and their actions to maintain themselves as they walk on that spiritual path. And you know, certain concepts become devalued, and it sort of maintains a structure of reality with certain things having more importance than others. Big question, but how are we to worship in light of the diamond Luminosity and pun intended?

Chris Bache  1:39:20  
Well, I'll tell you how I worship. I worship the universe. I worship the the diversity of life on the planet. I worship the manifestation of galaxies and solar systems and star systems. I worship, that's what's I worship, the the manifest abundance and the unfolding complexity of life itself, and I honor the hidden drivers of this reality. And you. You know, science is telling us what 95% is, dark energy and dark matter. 96% is and dark energy and dark matter, which we've never seen and we really don't understand, only 4% is visible in any realistic form. So it's not that big a stretch to think that the universe is growing. It's an unfolding out of an extraordinarily complex and infinite reality. So I honor the man of the universe as the manifest body of this intelligence, and I honor the intelligence which is manifesting as this body at the same time. So to me, you know, the medieval cathedrals of Europe were created in order to you walk into them and they the idea is they lift your eye to a higher horizon, to a deeper understanding. To me spending time digesting the images that were given to us by the Hubble telescope and its successor. Those are spiritual experiences. Those are profoundly rich spiritual meditations on on the intelligence that's manifesting itself as our universe. And then for me, I I reflect on my own experiences. I mean, I I can't manifest the experiences that I've had inside my time, space, body. I wish I could, but I can't manifest diamond Luminosity in my daily, daily consciousness. But I can remember and I can meditate upon and I can bring those experiences into my mind, and I can enter back into the edges of those experiences as part of, as part of a deepening of my own living process, right? And I'm also deeply moved by other people's experiences of this infinite intelligence. So that's why I really enjoy reading other people's psychedelic experiences, because I don't want to get trapped simply in my lens, in my particular lens, I like to see this infinite mystery as it's experienced by many different people, because that enriches my sense of its of its complexity.

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:42:25  
Wow, wow. I think I wrote wow, like 50 times as I was going along. What comes back for me is coming back to the scientific materialism. And maybe the an immediate thing that that could happen is a softening of our concept of scientific materialism, and hopefully psychedelics can play a part in that. I do want to mention interesting maybe coincidence, maybe it's not strong enough to be a synchronicity. But for me, reading your book, when you mentioned Carl Jung a few times, I thought, Oh, my God, no way. And then you specifically mentioned Carl Jung's, the Red Book, which I'm in the middle of right now. Just crazy. And then you mentioned Richard Tarnas a few times, and he and then he specifically said one point he mapped out history of the ideas of Western thought. Lo and behold, I'm in the middle of Richard Tarnas is the passion of the Western mind at the same time, very interesting book, and you realize just how immature Well, recent, let's say scientific materialism is like 300 years something scale of 10s of 1000s. So that was a funny coincidence for me. So if we can wrap it around, psychedelics are a tool, not necessarily for everyone. How could we best use psychedelics for spiritual awakening in light of the coming challenges that we may face?

Chris Bache  1:43:54  
Well, I hope we use them for more than spiritual awakening. I think, for example, the whole movement in the psychedelic Renaissance towards healing is really important. Because for I think when I look at human beings, I don't simply see a human being. I tend to see souls. And so when I look at children, I don't see I don't see young beings. They could be very, very old beings in a young body. And when I see old beings, I don't necessarily see, I mean old people. I don't see old beings. It could be a very young soul in an old body. And so I tend to look at the qualities of soul that are present in an incarnation. And my sense is at this particular time in history, people are incarnating with lots of former lives active in their current life, and they're incarnating with lots of unfinished business at the soul level. Alive in their life, there's a sense and that means that healing is a very important contribution, not only to their individual well being, but to our collective well being. So my sense is that we are incarnating generations of pain and suffering in this generation, in these generations, and that by clearing this pain and suffering, we are clearing out the whole system of all the garbage of our leftover from our egoic consciousness through 1000s of years of incarnations, and we're opening up and creating space for this deeper infusion of cosmic consciousness to enter into our lives. So psychedelics can be a significant part of this healing. So that's the one second if healing is allowed to deepen, then it becomes a tool of initiation into the intelligence of the universe, the intelligence that lies at the very core of our being, and it can psychedelics can help us experience, even if only temporarily, the truth of our divine nature and the truth of our inclusive nature, so that it really is like we are all leaves on a tree, and every leaf truly is part of my being. And only at the surface level does it look like we are separate leaves, but as a tree, we experience that we are all implicated in each other's lives, and so naturally compassion arises, fairness, justice arises out of that. So psychedelics can help us deepen and accelerate this process. A whole separate issue is the balancing of psychedelics with spiritual practice which is non psychedelic. I mean, I that's a whole separate issue. I don't think psychedelics by themselves is necessarily a very wise way to proceed. You need the support and grounding and insights that have been kept alive in our spiritual traditions, our meditative traditions and contemplative traditions that I think these two work hand in hand, well with each other. So I think those are maybe the most important. One of the is the hate, the accelerating of healing and the deepening of our insight into our true nature and into the nature of the universe. And then, if we want to push farther cosmological exploration, just takes that one step farther into a conscious opening to layers of reality that lie beyond simply our physical senses. And I think you don't have to push it as far as I did, to do a little bit of cosmological exploration, which can be very healthy and very supportive. I think I just pushed it so far, so hard it, you know, it just, it becomes a life defining project, and there's no need for it to become a life defining project for many people. But I think psychedelics have multiple layers of benefit that they can give us at this time. They can help heal us. They can help us come to our spiritual senses, and they can help give us a sense of the deeper mystery that we're part of.

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:48:40  
Got it beautiful. Yeah, I'd like to bring us back to just one little point I kind of skipped over, one little thought I want to ask you about. And just coming back to the the understanding of there being infinite levels that are higher and higher and higher, or by Huston Smith's law of inverse analogy, deeper and deeper and deeper. How do we align ourselves with the highest if there is no highest?

Chris Bache  1:49:15  
Oh, yeah, your question, catches the paradox. Doesn't catches the issue. Yeah. Yeah, you know, let me, let me give you. This is going to sound a little off target, but it'll be, it'll I'll focus it in. I often think that the relationship of physical reality to spiritual reality can be modeled on an apple, and physical reality is the skin of the apple, right? So, the entire physical world and all the levels is the skin of the apple. And if you if an apple starts and it's expanding, you know, there's like the. The universe is expanding and getting bitter. The skin is getting bigger, but the meat of the apple is spiritual reality, and we have a tendency, because we think of psychedelics as mind expanding, mind opening. And there is a subjective sense that the reality that we're entering is bigger than our physical reality. That tends to convey a sense that spiritual reality is bigger than physical reality. But I don't think that's necessarily an insight that generates when you go deeper and deeper, that sense of expansion into deeper space changes. So I'd like to give a different metaphor. If you go underneath physical reality, you get into a layer of spiritual reality. And if you go deeper in a deeper layer of spiritual reality, you start to drive towards the center of the apple. And as you drive deeper towards the center of the URL the apple, of course, forms fall away, because forms are part of the emergence of physical reality. And the light gets brighter and brighter and brighter as you drive to the center of the apple is because you're at the center is light, and light eventually manifests the green textures of the apple skin, but in the end, it's light. So you're asking the question now, how do we orient ourselves to the ultimate, even knowing that the ultimate is beyond our intellectual grasp? And I think the key to that is recognizing that the essence of my life and the essence of your life is fundamentally the same essence. We all come from the light. We are all fractal embodiments of the light. We are all evolving expressions of this manifesting intelligence, this self manifesting intelligence. And at that very, very deep level, my essence is the same as the essence of mosquitoes and ants and leaves and everything on the planet. And that's why when, when I go into a transcendental state, that is, I drop into selflessness, or Shunyata, I experience the world as one. And as the shamans would shout out, all my relations, all other levels of reality, all other beings are my relations. We're all kin in this planet, even though we may not be able to adequately conceptualize this essence, individual essence, the Atman, the Brahman, we can tune to it. We can know it. We can let it suffuse our being. We can, we can let go of anything small, which keeps us smaller than it, and we can regularly cultivate the practice of tuning to it. And that's not that is only partly an intellectual exercise. It's, it's deeper than an intellectual exercise. It's more of a tuning exercise, and that we can do even without having an adequate understanding of the final goal. It's just like it's an enjoyment. There is a sense of peace, there is a sense of harmony. There is a sense of Infinite Challenge, the challenge of infinity, but there's a profound sense of alignment that comes about in our person and in our relationships, the closer we draw to that reality. And we can do all of that without having any solid answers to what is the nature of ultimate reality.

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:54:09  
Got it. I mean, not really got it, but I'm glimpsing it that what comes to mind is the distinction between process oriented, say, spiritual practice or religion, and then goal oriented religion or spiritual practice, is that useful?

Chris Bache  1:54:25  
There it can be. I mean, basically one way of putting that. We can live in a world of nouns, or we can live in a world of verbs. Verbs are more accurate than nouns, right? That's just one of the insights that science and philosophy gives us so we live in a world of process, rather than a world of objects, right? And it's all process a human being is, is a process which begins lives and dies. You know? It goes, consciousness goes, evolves and completely, constantly changing, constantly changing. Changing. Neither you or I are the same at the end of our conversation as we were at the beginning. We've been changed by this contact. So it's all verbs. It's all process

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:55:12  
and looking noting the time. Maybe one thing, one more thing on this topic I'll just bring up. It's just, it's just, this is what it comes back to, at least for me, is, you know, in in certain scriptures, I just will pick Christianity, you know, Jesus says Not one word will change in the Scriptures until all is said and done. And other ones, Islam, you know, worship no other God but me or whatever. This kind of exclusionary thing doesn't seem to just be like a cultural interpretation of it. It's like right there in the core of the revelation of the religion. I don't know what do you make of that? In two minutes,

Chris Bache  1:55:48  
I understand I understand it. You know, there was a time in our history, not that long ago, where religions existed basically on specific continents. They were just kind of before the invention of the steam engine. Religions existed in a valley in a particular landscape. There wasn't mass migrations of populations moving around. The religion was part of a place. It was tied to a place. And when you bump up against other people in another place, there is a conflict between how your people see the reality and how those people see reality, and so the honoring the integrity of the vision was part of the process of people owning their identity in contrast to other people who have a different vision and a different identity. But of course, all of this changed with the invention of the steam engine, and then with the invention of travel, and then with the invention of the internet. Now everything's getting blended. And now, ever since the 19th century, scholars have been putting together these amalgams of gathering the world's wisdom together into these massive compendiums of trying to understand it all. We're wrapping our mind around the entire planet in that context, I think what we recognize is that what may have been a virtue in the ancient past now can become an encumbrance. It can become a limitation. So now, I think the greater wisdom is in understanding all of these religious traditions simultaneously, and understanding that the part the whole is greater than any of the individual parts, and so that the pattern of spirituality for the planet as a whole is a larger and more interesting story than the pattern of spirituality in one particular tradition versus another spirit another particular tradition. Okay, so it's just a different truth that comes forward in different historical circumstances. So on the one hand, I recognize, I recognize the sentiment that you described, and I honor it as an historical sentiment, but I don't feel beholden to it. To me, the greater challenge has been to try to understand the world's diversity of religious beliefs and spiritual beliefs, and then to, in my particular case, to take the exploration so deep that it radically eclipses all of our human experience in a larger landscape that emerges in deep spiritual experience.

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:58:46  
Wow. And just to wrap it up, I'll just add I got a sense of that. The first thing I ever read that led me down this deepening the spiritual path was Joseph Campbell and his writing about exactly that, this global sense of all the world's traditions. Yes. So thank you, Chris, so much. So much to meditate on.

Chris Bache  1:59:10  
Luke, it's been a pleasure. I thank you for the conversation. Thank you for giving me a lot of room to work and for your very thoughtful seating of questions. I appreciate

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:59:22  
it. Thank you, and I hope that this and other interviews will help you in digesting your own journeys and having the community finally to share your experiences with so I feel that I feel part of the same community with you, and I'm excited to see what you put out in the future.

Chris Bache  1:59:41  
These conversations do help me in sharing is good, and I hope they're useful to other people, but they truly help me too, because it it helps me digest all these things.

Luc Briede-Cooper  1:59:52  
Got it awesome. Thank you, Chris. You.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
