Chris Bache  0:01  
CH, we can't solve the problems, I think, which we're facing at the level of ego. So we either grow up or we go extinct. And what growing up looks like, I think, has to do with the maturation of the soul, the real sort of transition from ego identity to soul identity, because the soul lives in the world differently than the ego does. The soul has an awareness of its history, and therefore it has an aware an awareness of its extended relationships with all with people that it sees around it. And so since we have been black, white, red. We've been all the colors. We've been all the religions of the world. We've been rich, poor. We've been through that when the soul matures, there is this tremendous sense of compassion and generative freedom in that process, and that's what I think we need in order to solve where we're going.

Lauren Taus  1:08  
Welcome to embodied life, the podcast. My name is Lawrence house, and this show is a space for you to move past the traffic of the mind and into the stillness of your heart. The journey is inward, and a courageous traveler welcomes the wide range of their human experience. We are meeting pioneers, healers and change makers, who are showing us the way with important guides and maps, feel whatever it is that needs to be felt so that you can return home to yourself. Let's go. Let's get in bodied.

Lauren Taus  1:57  
Chris Bache is professor emeritus in the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at Youngstown State University, where he taught for 33 years. He is also adjunct faculty at the California Institute of integral studies, Emeritus fellow at the Institute of Noetic Sciences, and on the Advisory Council of Grof legacy training,

Lauren Taus  2:21  
an award winning teacher and international speaker. Chris's work explores the philosophical implications of Non-ordinary states of consciousness, especially psychedelic states.

Lauren Taus  2:33  
He has written four books, translated into eight languages, life cycles, a study of reincarnation in light of contemporary consciousness, research dark night, early dawn, a pioneering work in psychedelic philosophy and collective consciousness, the living classroom, an exploration of teaching and collective fields of consciousness and LSD and the mind of the universe, The story of his 20 year journey with LSD

Lauren Taus  3:03  
between the years of 1979 and 1999

Unknown Speaker  3:07  
Chris had 73 high dose LSD experiences.

Unknown Speaker  3:13  
We sat down to talk about these experiences and the book that he wrote about them. I enjoyed every moment of my time with Chris and I hope you enjoy our conversation. Take a listen.

Unknown Speaker  3:36  
Thank you so much for taking the time to share your extraordinary experiences and wisdom. I'm

Unknown Speaker  3:44  
happy to share as much as I can. I'm also very much aware that your work has been working primarily with the therapeutic applications of psychedelics, and of course, my work is very different from that, so you'll have to sort of show me how I can support your work with what I have

Lauren Taus  4:06  
very happy to do so. And I think that there's a larger conversation that I'm part of and that I'm weaving together around consciousness. And for me personally, one of the biggest parts of the medicine is to sense into what else we're part of.

Unknown Speaker  4:25  
Yes, and I think that's a lot where you come in. Chris,

Unknown Speaker  4:29  
okay, all right, so can you tell me a little bit about how you started your explorations in the psychedelic space?

Unknown Speaker  4:40  
Well, that I have to go back to 1978

Chris Bache  4:44  
when I had just started my university position at YSU. And that first year, I encountered the work of Ian Stevenson, whose research on reincarnation turned my worldview upside down. And I also encountered the work.

Chris Bache  5:00  
Stanislav Grof, who turned me upside down even more because he gave me a method. He showed me the method that would allow me to explore these deep states of consciousness. Now, I was trained as a philosopher of religion. I'm not a clinician, but what interested me about these substances were their capacity, not only to heal or to clarify my personal consciousness, but to explore the deeper structure of consciousness itself, and eventually the mind of the universe. So that's where I began, and that's where I began doing the work. And of course, to do that, my most of my life, or a good large slice of my life, had to go underground, because I was working at a state university. I was working, you know, in a public environment, the age of

Unknown Speaker  5:44  
legally sanctioned psychedelic research was over in 1970 This was 78

Unknown Speaker  5:51  
so I divided my life into my public life, and then in my private Life, I began this psychedelic work.

Unknown Speaker  6:00  
And you took 73 high dose LSD trips over the course of 20 years, yeah, and really high dose,

Chris Bache  6:10  
yeah. And I wouldn't recommend that. I wouldn't do it the same way again myself, and I really strongly recommend that people don't do it that way. I would be much gentler with myself, and I would have a much more modulated approach, but yeah, that's what I did. I started. There were three sessions of medium doses, about 250 mics, and then for the remainder of all the sessions, I was working at 500 to 600 micrograms. What inspired you to double the dose and continue in the way that you did.

Unknown Speaker  6:43  
Well first I saw Stan's early work and the distinction between psycholytic therapy and psychedelic therapy, so that I knew that working with high doses was safe and could be managed effectively. I knew that the sessions would be more difficult working at that intensity, but I thought if I were, you know, in focused on confronting my shadow, that I could work with those doses, as long as I could manage the intensity of what was emerging. But I started working at those levels, frankly, simply because, in the beginning dual career, arranging a session day in a dual career, marriage and so children would be there was just it's hard to do, so I figured I wanted to make the most out of every day. But then, after I worked with these doses for a while, I developed

Unknown Speaker  7:31  
an aptitude for them. I liked where they were taking me, and I just continued to press on in it

Unknown Speaker  7:38  
for the sake of a listener who might not have as much knowledge as we do. Can you name the difference between psychedelic therapy and psychedelic therapy? Psycholytic therapy is low dose, LSD therapy, working with doses anywhere from 50 on average, about 150 micrograms, up to maybe 300 but mostly in the 150 or so range, and it's a it's an amplification of consciousness. It causes your unconscious to surface, layer by layer, you know, different layers of your personal unconscious, and then the perinatal level of consciousness. Psychedelic therapy is high dose therapy was which was originally developed to work with terminally ill cancer patients to try to blow through all the levels of consciousness and to trigger a Near-Death Experience, or an approximation of an interior death experience, so they could have a an experience of where they were going when they were dying. And it was quite successful. So I thought, you know, if you could do this safely, one it was limited to three times in that early protocol. So I thought if you could do it three times, you could do it more than three times safely. What I hadn't counted on is that when you do do it like that, things happen and things are started that go beyond the framework of the early psychedelic therapy.

Unknown Speaker  9:01  
Chris, when you started this work yourself, did you anticipate that it would go for 20 years and that you would continue at such high levels of exploration and experience?

Chris Bache  9:14  
I didn't. No, I didn't. I didn't anticipate where it would go. I basically, I mean, I worked. Let me back up a little bit. I worked for four years. I did 17 sessions, then I took a six year break, and then I worked for 10 years very intensely. I was doing about five sessions a year on average. During that time, I didn't really have a plan, I didn't have a strategy. I was just really following the experiences, following where they went, and as long as I could manage it, and as long as they were continuing to unfold new levels or new experiences that were philosophically productive and personally productive, I just went with it until I got towards the end. And as I explained in the book, things developed that just led me to know that it was time.

Unknown Speaker  10:00  
For me to stop. That's when I stopped. What

Unknown Speaker  10:04  
were the questions that were leading you? What were you looking to answer or experience with the psychedelic work? Well, as I said, I was trained in Western religious thought. I was trained in philosophy of religion, so I had all the kind of questions that people take into philosophy in that classical sense of the love of wisdom, not in the modern sense, which is highly mathematized types of inquiry. So I, you know, I wanted to understand what the structure of reality was. I wanted to understand why life is the way it is, and why our life's life is the way it is, and what are the what are the working dynamics? What's the rule book? What's the manual in this damn thing? And I wanted to understand the deep structure of the universe as much as I could. That's the drive so and I learned a lot, I mean, the universe. What I found is, if you approach these things conscientiously, and if you approach them in a way that encourages clear contact and clean contact and high retention, and if you really work on recording your sessions and integrating your sessions as you go, it's It's as if the universe sees that you're working hard to absorb the teachings from it, and it starts to pay you attention. And it took me systematically through levels of consciousness and levels of experience that I always felt, you know, the intelligence of the consciousness that I was engaged in? Can you describe those levels?

Unknown Speaker  11:43  
Well,

Unknown Speaker  11:45  
it took me a while to sort of figure it out. After I was done with the work in 99

Unknown Speaker  11:52  
and I was sort of plotting what the larger trajectory was, what is the story that what I would be telling in this book? I eventually differentiated five levels of consciousness that seemed to be

Unknown Speaker  12:05  
operational. The first one is takes place at the level of personal mind, where you're basically going beyond your personal time, space identity, culminating in what we classically call ego death, which is simply just the explosion of your consciousness beyond the parameters of your physical experience. The second took place at the collective level of mind, at the species mind,

Unknown Speaker  12:32  
lots of experiences in the collective unconscious of the collective psyche. Third Level took place at the archetypal mind, going deeper beyond simply the species mind going deeper into archetype of reality. Fourth was the one mind, causal reality, the where the domain is, where the fundamental theme is oneness. And there are many degrees of oneness and many permutations of oneness, but basically, that's the core domain. And then in the last five years of my work, I entered what I came to call the diamond Luminosity work, which is the clear light of absolute reality, as it's called in Buddhism Dharmakaya.

Unknown Speaker  13:19  
How is this not therapeutic. I mean, all of these journeys and all of these kind of dimensions are so important. I mean, I can only grasp at some of them from a conceptual basis, but I imagine there must be tremendous relief and and ease when you can access

Unknown Speaker  13:41  
dimensions. Sure, it's very healing. You might think of it as healing at the soul level, rather than healing at the personal level. I mean, there were healings that took place at the personal level, like everybody I had issues going into this work,

Chris Bache  13:55  
and there was personal healing in relationships and early childhood relationships. But overall, I didn't walk into this life with a whole lot of trauma, so there wasn't a whole lot of deeply buried trauma in my psyche.

Unknown Speaker  14:11  
But at a deeper level, it was very healing at the level of the Soul, in that when one begins to have what we often call mystical experiences, or experiences of oneness, when you're taken by the what I experienced as being taken by the universe and being shown how life works, how reincarnation works. What's the larger trajectory of the reincarnation dynamic being taken deeper into the evolutionary dynamics that are that underpin our very existence back from billions of years back and billions of years forward. You know, those are questions that I had been holding and wanting to understand for many lifetimes, and in that respect, it was very healing at a soul level.

Unknown Speaker  15:00  
And very satisfying, because it gave me enough of a sense of what's going on that it allowed me to, in a sense, relax, and it quieted that existential hunger that we all have to understand the game of life better.

Unknown Speaker  15:18  
Yeah, and I know that you had these experiences with your wife as your sitter, yeah? And she's a psychologist, right? And you're, you would do these journeys on Saturday mornings, usually, yeah, and that, you know, music was a part of it. Did you ever have one of these 73 high dose LSD experiences, or 70 because the first three were medium you mentioned, with different conditions or without a sitter.

Unknown Speaker  15:51  
I have done sessions without a sitter, but never with these in when I was doing this high dose work, I've done sessions after this particular phase of work ended lower dose sessions or with gentler substances. But when I was doing the high dose series, I always had a series. So I was always protected from the world. I was always working in isolation from the world. I was always buffered. I was always taken care of by a sitter.

Unknown Speaker  16:19  
There was always music involved. I only had contact with my sitter during a session, largely through the music. Not a lot of conversation. When you're working with doses of LSD this high, your verbal functions are pretty much knocked out. You're not really in strong contact necessarily with the room.

Unknown Speaker  16:39  
So it was a very, very controlled environment. I called it the Kiva. It's this kind of, you know, you climb into the Kiva and and then you pull up the ladder and you're there for the duration of the experience.

Unknown Speaker  16:53  
Yeah, were you able to control or direct the sessions in any way? No, not really. When? Again, difference working at low doses, where you maybe can hold on an idea of something you want to work on. When you're working with doses of LSD this high, the most effective thing you can do is just surrender completely to the process and

Unknown Speaker  17:17  
not knowing where it's going to take you, but just trust that wherever it takes you, there is an intelligence behind it that's larger than yours, and you can trust that intelligence. So I didn't try to control it. In fact, I really there were times when I was begging it, please take me this way, but it would take me that way, you know? So, yeah, I just would surrender to it all and let it go.

Unknown Speaker  17:40  
Did your wife ever participate? Did you ever What was that like for her? I mean, obviously it's best asked to her, but I'm curious about what that was like for her. What that was like for your marriage, like, what was

Unknown Speaker  17:53  
what was that like?

Unknown Speaker  17:56  
No, she never participated. She supported me. She really wasn't fond of the sessions. They were not natural to her mode of spirituality. Carol had an early in her life orientation towards meditative practice, contemplative practice. She is a serious Vajrayana practitioner. After our separation in 2000 she has gone on to complete her three year, three month retreat in the classic Vajrayana tradition. So she's a serious practitioner. She was never attracted to working with psychedelics, so we just kind of, and I followed her into the Vajrayana community. I sort of, I benefited greatly from learning the vadna practices that she was learning in various retreats and settings, but she wasn't attracted to the psychedelic work. It was too violent. It was too too intense and and she really, she had other criticisms of it. It just it wasn't her cup of tea, and we just accommodated that difference in our marriage. We just, we navigated that particular difference comfortably enough.

Unknown Speaker  19:11  
Nice,

Lauren Taus  19:13  
you mentioned the violence of psychedelics. And often we speak in the space about

Lauren Taus  19:20  
the, you know, the dying, right? The death and rebirth. How has that process impacted you? And how was that for for you personally, during these experiences? Yeah,

Unknown Speaker  19:33  
well, violence maybe is not quite the right word that shows up in the early stages when you're going through the very powerful kriyas, and you're doing this tremendous physical and emotional detoxification, which can leave you going into convulsions, bouncing around the mattress, where your body throws off vast quantities of physical stress and emotional stress out of your body. But there is a certain quote.

Unknown Speaker  20:00  
Violence in dying. But over the course of the work, I learned that the deepest breakthroughs followed the deepest purifications, and the deepest deaths yielded the deepest ecstatic joys on the other side. So as that became clear over the course of the work, death became my closest ally in the work. And so rather than kind of trying to navigate through

Unknown Speaker  20:28  
bad trips or trying to avoid that type of harsh confrontation, I would do everything I could to

Unknown Speaker  20:36  
facilitate the emergence of that type of confrontation. I would go right at it, and that was that was not because I like suffering. That was because I like what was on the other side of that suffering, I came to understand that even death in a psych in a psychedelic context, is a form of purification. It's a form of letting go of reality as you know it at one level in order to gain access to reality at a deeper level.

Unknown Speaker  21:04  
So it just became part of the work

Unknown Speaker  21:08  
I certainly relate to that any any of the psychedelic experiences that I've had that have confronted me with my own mortality and the dying of have been generative and life affirming and liberating, and yet, like in this field, it's one of the scarier things for most people. Yeah, I understand that, and maybe I pushed it a little harder than most. That makes some people in the therapeutic community may be uncomfortable, but once you understand that, once you learned that

Unknown Speaker  21:44  
the deep purification, the deep confrontation with the limits at any level, leads to ecstatic deliverance from those limits at another level, then it's the most natural thing in the world,

Unknown Speaker  21:57  
right? Well, it's quite natural for us to die, yeah. I mean, nobody survives the game of life and and I think that we live in a culture that's just so uncomfortable talking about and engaging with content around death, because we don't understand what death is. You know, we're just so kind of chronically constricted to within time, space, realities. We don't understand what happens to us when we don't when we die. We don't understand the liberation that death involves. And it's not just psychedelics that show us this. But of course, near death episode research shows us this hypnotic regression past life therapy work can show us this. Michael Newton's work, for example, shows us this, once you begin to understand the larger circle, once you understand that life is a circle, that there is a birth,

Unknown Speaker  22:50  
a deep internalization of circumstances and challenges learning, and then there is a death, which basically is a phase of Homecoming, a phase of returning to the light, then what's to be afraid of dying? Dying is graduation. Birth is when the hard work begins. That's when the you should be afraid of.

Unknown Speaker  23:11  
So you're not afraid of dying. No, not at all. In fact, just the opposite. I look forward to it, because I've been through that death process so many times, and I've been privileged to be given experiences of where I'm going when I die that I'm looking forward to it very much,

Unknown Speaker  23:32  
not rushing there no

Unknown Speaker  23:35  
my work is here as long as I can be productive and as long as I can contribute to the larger project that we're a part of, but it is nice to know that it's particularly as you get older. I'm 70 now, you know, and you get older, it's nice to know that the one thing that life cannot do is stop you from returning to paradise. So it's like sliding down a sliding board, leading you to plunge into a swimming pool of pure light. You know, it's just joy waiting for us at the end of this life. What's the point of all this?

Unknown Speaker  24:12  
That's a big question, isn't

Unknown Speaker  24:15  
it?

Unknown Speaker  24:17  
Well, there are lots of ways, I guess, we can begin to answer that question. But any early answers that we give to that question would need to be kind of, we need to stack them up, because it has so many layers to it.

Unknown Speaker  24:34  
You know, part of my work is in the psychedelic work, and before the psychedelic work involved reincarnation. So I see reincarnation as a natural fact of life, so extending over multiple, multiple generations, hundreds, 1000s of lifetimes, we're constantly learning. We're constantly growing. We make mistakes. We learn from mistakes. We're going through this developmental process. I think.

Unknown Speaker  25:00  
One of the things that's happening in this process is not simply the good that we do or the growth that we undergo in every individual life, but cumulatively. It's not just like we're going from first grade second grade to graduate school, layer by layer, but cumulatively, I think all of our farmer lives eventually, sooner or later, they congeal into one integrated consciousness, the totality of our consciousness a being of hundreds of 1000s of years old.

Unknown Speaker  25:35  
We know that we return to that consciousness when we die, because that's the rhythm of reincarnation. We go from soul when we die to incarnate. We're ego, soul. Ego, back and forth over and over again. But eventually it comes into, I think sooner or later, the soul manifests in its entirety on Earth. So I think in part,

Unknown Speaker  25:59  
the process is about learning. It's about activating the capacities which are inherent in our nature. And our nature at its core, classically, is the nature of divinity. Atman is Brahman, so the consciousness, the capacities that we are activating are the same capacities that created the physical universe, the capacities, the capacity that creates galaxies, we're learning how to activate that and use those and use those to create heaven on earth eventually. Of course, there are all these intermediate stages. You could say, well, we're learning love and we're learning service, and that's all true. We're learning to surrender violence. We're learning compassion, and those are all intermediate aspects. But at a deeper level, I think you could say we're learning how to be gods, and I mean that modestly, but I mean that literally. We're learning how to create, how to literally manifest the deepest capacity of our being to create our reality in the very demanding circumstances of time and space.

Unknown Speaker  27:13  
And time and space is a very demanding environment. It's much more demanding than spiritual reality, but it's very useful in that respect,

Unknown Speaker  27:22  
I work as an academy and assisted psychotherapist, and I had a session recently where a client said, time is just an adjective. It's not really a thing. And had this whole journey around the infinite. And what's it like? Can you speak into the experience of transcending time and space?

Unknown Speaker  27:41  
Well, there's a tremendous sense of freedom. Just

Unknown Speaker  27:47  
your entire physical life will kind of falls away. And I've had experiences where all the leftover desires or unfulfilled ambitions from my historical existence just fall away

Unknown Speaker  28:01  
in the face of the most elementary conditions or possibilities of being conscious at these deeper levels, there's a tremendous sense of Homecoming, deeper and deeper levels of Homecoming, kind of there's a tremendous sense of remembering. And you ask yourself, How could I possibly have forgotten this? How could I have forgotten this for so many billions of years. So there's a tremendous sense of

Unknown Speaker  28:25  
being where you belong, being where you came from, in some essential way, this extraordinary sense of peace, just, you know, a peace that,

Unknown Speaker  28:41  
as the Bible says, The peace that surpasses all understanding. Something along those lines, it's an extraordinary peace. And at a deeper level, when you dissolve into the radiant light. In my cosmology, I understand that all physical existence ultimately merges out of light,

Unknown Speaker  29:01  
and the light emerges out of the primal void. But when you dissolve into light, to actually be light, to become light, or to dissolve into that light, so that your being has the quality of life, it has the infinite extension, the simultaneity, the clarity and of light.

Unknown Speaker  29:24  
Yeah, that sounds pretty

Unknown Speaker  29:29  
No, you know, Chris, right now my mind is is very much holding on to the world that we live in. I'm like, very and I'm looking at a very binary world, yeah, man, woman, black, white,

Unknown Speaker  29:49  
yeah,

Unknown Speaker  29:50  
good, bad. And

Unknown Speaker  29:54  
you've spoken about your own personal transformation, shifting into a.

Unknown Speaker  30:00  
Collective transformation you've spoken about experiencing profound pain that wasn't yours, but was sort of systemic and maybe ancient,

Unknown Speaker  30:11  
given the environment that we find ourselves in. Now

Unknown Speaker  30:15  
can you and how do you relate to

Unknown Speaker  30:19  
to this sort of historic suffering and this, these historic systems of oppression within the context of like the light and the oneness and like outside time and space. Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  30:31  
Well, again, you're asking, it's a it's a very large question.

Unknown Speaker  30:36  
It is, it is, and may not be a fair question, but as some of the repair, okay? It's just large, that's all, yeah, you know, reincarnation is not simply a personal thing. It's not a matter of simply a personal soul, evolving, making better choices, learning and growing, becoming more it's also a collective thing. Every 100 years, entire generation. I mean, we're constantly the human species is reincarnating. All of our individual incarnations are part of the single intelligence of our species incarnating. So there, the human species is reincarnating and growing in this dynamic way. And a lot of it involves actualizing and then transcending kind of lesser forms of our capacity, lesser our lower self are, you might say our animal self, if you want to put it that way, I wouldn't, but

Unknown Speaker  31:30  
and so I think you know humanity, like individuals, are growing deeper, better, sweeter, stronger, more courageous. Humanity is growing in that way as well. But we find ourselves at all sorts of we're at a pivot point. I think we're coming to and this was, well, let me back up just a little bit. When I began this work, I thought, Oh, this is about personal healing, personal enlightenment, personal spiritual realization. But after a couple of years, most of my work was not focused on personal work at all. It became very much. I was drawn into some collective project that I didn't understand the beginning, and I began to understand only slowly. A lot of the the engagement, the pain I was engaging, as you mentioned, seemed to be collective pain. I seemed my sessions were being used by a larger intelligence to clear collective trauma, which I understand is kind of the trauma of history that's stored within the collective unconscious. But there always has been a strong collective theme in my work, and so starting in the 23rd session, and continuing consistently, intermittently all the way up through the 70th session. A reoccurring theme in her work was the evolution and the transformation of humanity. And there was this recurring series of teachings that I was given that humanity is coming to a turning point. Humanity is coming to a major breakthrough. Humanity is entering a great awakening, a profound spiritual transformation, a before and after point in history that's going to change everything, which I eventually came to understand as a change in the fundamental architecture of the collective psyche, so that when the architecture, when the core blueprint of the of the human psyche, changes, then all individual incarnations subsequent to that point in history will be actualizing their individual life in the context of this shifted archetypal blueprint for the human psyche. And just as individuals, as they go into, as they work towards mystical union, go through a dark night of the soul, a very intense purification process where they have to let go of everything which is keeping them small in order to open to that which is large. Humanity seems to be going through the same process we're having to let go of everything which is small in order to open to this new to give birth to this new human. And what are the things which have kept us small? Our hatreds, our divisions, our self, preferential treatment, by race, by religion, by class, by country, all the ways in which we've divided history, all the ways in which we partitioned the planet, in these ultimately socially constructed, but ultimately unreal divisions. And we're all of these. It's kind of like the sins of our fathers and mothers are coming up on us now. It's like we're vomiting up the racism. We're vomiting up the gender abuse. We're vomiting up all these sort of terrible things that we've been doing to each other in the past in order to permanently remove them from our system, in order to confront our past.

Unknown Speaker  35:00  
Right, but we're doing this not simply to heal that past. I think we're doing this to lay the foundation, the energetic Foundation, for a different communion with the divine, a deeper communion with the universe, a more porous communion, and one which will reconnect us, not only with each other, but will reconnect with us with the universe, and allow a more intimate rapport with the universe to develop, and a rapport, I think, which has immediate consequences.

Unknown Speaker  35:33  
I think that

Unknown Speaker  35:35  
since all the intelligence, all the things we could ever want to know, all the problems that we could ever want to solve, the answers already exist inside the divine mind, inside divine reality. And of course, when I use the word divine, I don't, I hesitate to use that language because I don't mean it in a theistic sense. I don't mean it in the God in the narrow, culturally defined kind of sense. I mean it in a in a post religious kind of broader horizon. I mean it in the horizon on the scale that science has shown us of a universe millions and billions of years old, a creative project, billions of years in the making,

Unknown Speaker  36:15  
a framework which just dwarfs all the religions of history. But this process is basically taking us into

Unknown Speaker  36:26  
a new opportunity and an unprecedented opportunity, and this so means this is a hard time, the time of birth, and I think that's what we are entering. Is a time of labor. Gestation is long, labor is fast, and we have been gestating the future human for 1000s and 1000s of years through our evolutionary reincarnation dynamic.

Unknown Speaker  36:52  
But the time of giving birth to this new human

Unknown Speaker  36:56  
is now. It's short, it's intense, it's very hard. It's very painful, but it's magnificent. The project is coming into a time of fruition, a hard time, because it's hard to let go of our habits of the past, but a magnificent time, a time of grace, and I think that's, that's what's happening to us now. I think we're in a very tumultuous time, and we're being pulled very, very fiercely by forces which are trying to pull us back to the past, back to the old ways, back to the divisions of history, back to patriarchy, back to my religion is better than your religion, and my race is better than your race. And then there are the forces you're pulling us into a future, into a future of more intimate equality, more intimate communion with each other, a different relationship with the Earth, a different transformed relationship to the Earth itself. And it's all on the line right now because I don't think we can this world was built by ego. That means it was built by a species at a certain level of its psycho spiritual maturity, where it had matured into self consciousness, but it had not pressed its maturity to the point where it really grasped the truth of our interconnectivity, the truth of our profound participation in each other's lives and in the life of the planet. We can't, we can't solve the problems, I think, which we're facing at the level of ego. So we either grow up or we go extinct. And what growing up looks like, I think, has to do with the maturation of the soul, the the real sort of transition from ego identity to soul identity, because the soul lives in the world differently than the ego does. The soul has an awareness of its history, and therefore it has an aware an awareness of its extended relationships with all with people that it sees around it. And so since we have been black, white, red, we've been all the colors. We've been all the religions of the world. We've been rich, poor. We've been through that when the soul matures, there is this tremendous sense of compassion and generative freedom in that process, and that's what I think we need in order to solve where we're going.

Unknown Speaker  39:27  
I gotta take that in for a second.

Unknown Speaker  39:30  
Well said, Chris. And there's so many different pieces along the way that really echo in the chambers of this soul. And when I look outside, I feel like it's one giant Ayahuasca vomit, and there's like, all of it's coming forth and it's coming out, and I want it to, like, bring it, bring it on, so that we can let it go. Yeah. And I've also likened this process to giving birth, which, in my mind, if you just look at a woman giving birth and you.

Unknown Speaker  40:00  
Have no idea what's happening. You might think she's dying

Unknown Speaker  40:03  
and there's blood and poop and pee and screaming and crying and and it's not pretty. Yeah,

Unknown Speaker  40:11  
yeah,

Unknown Speaker  40:12  
new life, and it's beautiful. And I think that's why I know you're a yoga teacher, and so I think that's why disciplines like meditation and yoga and operating within a therapeutic awareness is really important, because there's a tremendous amount of poison coming through our systems. Is a tremendous amount of conditioning. And if we don't have a system where we're every day purifying ourselves this energy, which is a collective energy and it's part of our personal story, but it's a collective story, if we, if we don't constantly do something to let it go through us, it can get stuck and get lodged in the system. So never has it been more important, I think, to have regimens of purification, self transformation as part of our daily habit,

Unknown Speaker  41:02  
couldn't agree more. And I've heard you also say, Chris, that sort of the the twin anchors for the work that you did were courage and grounding. Yeah,

Unknown Speaker  41:15  
yeah, courage to face the difficult experiences when they rise, and grounding to bring back the insights that one is given and ground them into your daily life. And what we're finding with psychedelics is that it's it's getting easier and easier to have extraordinary experiences with psychedelics, and now we're beginning to pivot to, in some ways, the harder task, or at least the equally hard task, of holding on to those experiences, integrating those experiences, literally into our body, into our minds, into our social relationships. Yeah, do you have any particular strategies that you've found to be effective in terms of integration? As a clinician that, again, is working with psychedelic medicine, I have my worksheets. I invite my clients to journal, to create art, to dance, to do whatever feels relevant to the individual and the the learning. But, um, yeah, I think that commonly, profound experiences are not met with profound life changes. And how do how do we bridge that gap? Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  42:22  
Well, the things, all the things you mentioned, I think, are really good things, which are basically using all our talent, whatever our particular talents are, to reach out, grab and hold on, to talk about them, to write about them, to create music about them, to draw them, and most of all, I think, to follow the teachings which we're given. Because in our psychedelic sessions, we are given teachings. We're given instructions, and you have to then put those into practice. You have to practice them every day, you know, so as you go through

Unknown Speaker  42:57  
and I think we have to sort of self modulate, and this, I wouldn't say I've been very good at that, but we have to sort of pace ourselves to know when we are,

Unknown Speaker  43:06  
when we should slow down, when we should speed up, when we've gotten enough that we need to digest it longer rather than taking on more.

Unknown Speaker  43:17  
For me, of course, being an intellectual, in the sense it's my work is to sort of be mentally oriented. I spend a lot of time thinking about and trying to understand my experiences and understand the implications of the experiences. But someone like Alex Gray, while I'm sure he's intellectually absorbs his experiences. Look what he does with his experiences. I mean, he creates these magnificent works of art. You know,

Unknown Speaker  43:43  
other people are doing are plunged into social activism to actually bring about the social transformation that has a chance of saving this planet from us, of taking us into this great future. So different strategies for different people, but it all involve some type of way of basically taking the time and paying attention to make those wonderful insights or those wonderful experiences, not just memories, but part of our living tissue of our life.

Unknown Speaker  44:18  
And you've said, I don't remember exactly the language. But essentially, these experiences give us a taste of the infinite, and integrating that into the finite body and psyche of an individual is

Unknown Speaker  44:34  
a bit challenging. And you've said as well that it took you 10 years to to really kind of digest what you experienced in the 20

Unknown Speaker  44:42  
Yeah, when I came back, when I stopped my work in 99

Unknown Speaker  44:47  
I thought that I would just be able, since I had, by that time, been given so many gifts, I thought I could simply withdraw and would be able to

Unknown Speaker  44:59  
nourish myself.

Unknown Speaker  45:00  
Health by the continued digesting and assimilation of those gifts. But what I found was that it was more complicated. I found that that was true, but that was only half the truth. The other half that I had to confront was the tremendous sense of loss that I had of not being able to enter this deeply into into the communion with the universe. So there was a real sense of

Unknown Speaker  45:26  
a loss of communion, because I could not sustain this deep communion in my daily life. There are some beings who can. There are some great teachers. And the great masters of the meditation traditions have always been my heroes, and they can hold these experiences in an abiding way that wasn't the case for me, and so it did. It took me about 10 years to get over my sense of loss and to get to basically recommit myself to being

Unknown Speaker  46:00  
as I was, who I was, what I was, where I was, for the remainder of my life, and do as much as I could with that time.

Unknown Speaker  46:10  
Yeah, yeah. And for me, the other thing that made it hard to come back was, of course, our society's rules that we can't talk about these things. I could not I could not teach. I'm a teacher. I love to teach. I could not teach from this knowledge. I could not share it. And so writing LSD in the mind of the universe has been a very satisfying part of integrating my work, of publicly, owning my experiences, beginning to teach on the basis of those experiences, and not just my experiences. Of course, if my experiences weren't supported by the psychedelic experiences all the other people who are working in the psychedelic community, then they would amount to nothing. But given the fact that I'm simply part of a movement, and there's a tremendous coherence in this movement, that's the significance that we are entering into the systematic integration of psychedelics into our culture. That's the exciting part. That's that's the teaching moment. Having community, for me has always been one of the most important integrative tools. And people who know me in my journey work. And I know you said, you know, I was in I was not in San Francisco, I was not in LA or a place where this was something that was fair ground for conversation. And then, of course, the risks in terms of being a philosophy professor and not feeling safe to talk about what you were experiencing, yeah, I'm glad that those conditions have shifted. They have shifted. I'm glad too, because that cumulative what I found was that it's kind of schizogenic. It kind of makes you I mean, I know I divided my life into these two halves, but I didn't realize the wear and tear that that division was going to cause. Because when you're constantly checking yourself, when you can say one thing to one person, you can't say something to somebody else, you're living a divided reality. And those divisions begin to enter into your psyche, and they produce cracks, which I had not anticipated in the beginning, and so coming out of the psychedelic closet was, in some ways, just as liberating as coming out of any closet. And we know what some of these closets have been, and how same making it is to come out of those closets. Yeah. What do your children think about this work?

Unknown Speaker  48:40  
Well,

Unknown Speaker  48:44  
I think they understand it to varying degrees, some more than others. They have an aptitude for it more than others.

Unknown Speaker  48:52  
I think some have some intellectual reservations.

Unknown Speaker  48:58  
Some completely understand and rejected and accepted. Others are kind of understand it, but kind of from the sidelines, that not as a participant, a

Unknown Speaker  49:13  
range, there's a range, there's a range. One. I think my proudest achievement, and I've done a lot of interesting things in my years. It's converting my father to psychedelic experience in his 70s. And my dad is my prescribing MD In my clinical practice. And, you know, I've developed, as well, a relationship with a lot of the Maps team and and Rick, for example, talks so much about the importance of talking about these experiences and coming out of the psychedelic closet, and I think doing so in Family Constellations is also really healing and important. Yeah, I ask now i Chris you 500 to 600 micrograms, like

Unknown Speaker  49:57  
I know you said you don't recommend it. Yeah?

Unknown Speaker  50:00  
But what was like the

Unknown Speaker  50:02  
gift in that

Unknown Speaker  50:05  
the gift is that it's like taking a month meditation retreat and cramming it into five hours.

Unknown Speaker  50:14  
The gift is,

Unknown Speaker  50:16  
again, I don't recommend it, but having gone through it, I just try to describe it objectively. It is a very, it's a very accelerated explosion of your life. It's not It's very different than low dose psychedelic work, where you sort of soften the boundaries of your life and you have certain amounts of cognitive functions, and the shadow begins to surface, and you begin to engage it. And working with very high doses, when you're amplifying those doses with very intense music and in isolation, so on so forth, it just basically, it just blows your psyche completely apart, layer by layer, until eventually you're dissolving yourself into the universe. So you basically, on Saturday morning, you're in time space, and then you just blow yourself apart and you dissolve. It's not like you're not there, except by continuity of thought, pro of consciousness, but you're not functioning as Chris Bache, having an experience, you dissolve as Chris Bache, and dissolve into some stratum of existence and some, some field of reality. And you you literally have to work as I did, at least. You dissolve and you become that reality. You dissolve into that reality. And you have continuity. If you do it well, you have continuity of memory in and out. But you don't have continuity of identity in the sense that in when you are dissolved into these fields of consciousness, you can do things that my Chris Bache could never do, and you can experience things and learn things that Chris Bache could never learn within his ordinary time, space reality. You're just blown into these realities. You get to live there for a few hours, and then slowly the second miracle happens, which brings you back into your integrated time space identity. I seem to be have a psychological makeup that makes it easier. I seem to be able to dissolve into those realities without too many problems, and to congeal without many problems. And both of those rhythms are important, the letting go and dissolving into and then the coming back and becoming a single human being, again,

Unknown Speaker  52:44  
so profound and given that you don't recommend that, what would you advise for someone who is potentially seeking to access some of these experiences?

Unknown Speaker  52:56  
Well, I would recommend a more balanced regimen, I would recommend

Unknown Speaker  53:03  
low dose session, high dose sessions, balance with low dose LSD sessions. I would recommend balancing LSD with more body grounded psychedelics like Psilocybin or Ayahuasca, because LSD tends to be I think of it as kind of a high altitude psychedelic.

Unknown Speaker  53:23  
And it's very, very different from Psilocybin, which is a much more kind of body emotional, you know, sense of psychedelic. So I would basically, I'd be more nuanced. I would just be more balanced in the rhythm. What

Unknown Speaker  53:39  
if I had a breakthrough session, I would balance that in the subsequent sessions with Psilocybin sessions, which would help me integrate and absorb the very intense energies that I had gotten dissolved into. Because I just mentioned, one of the things I learned was every step into a deeper state of consciousness is a step into a higher level of energy. So you're constantly having to transform your entire psycho physical system to enter into a state of energy, and to do it in a way that you can maintain cognitive coherence at that level. Because it's one thing to just touch them briefly in a confused way in a session, but if you want to enter a state of consciousness and learn how to hold that level of awareness, so that you can engage that with continuity of memory and continuity of consciousness, so that the universe can meet you there and engage you there, then you have to acclimate to that energy. You really have to go through all this transformational process to be able to stabilize at that level. And I found, for example, that after every major breakthrough to another level of consciousness, the next session was always very difficult, very challenging, very turgid, because it involved ahead to sort of once.

Unknown Speaker  55:00  
Broke into a new level of purity, then I had to go through a process of cleaning out in my system all the levels, all the different components of my being that were lower than that level so that I could return to that level with clear and sustained focus. So it's it's an energetic thing as well as a cognitive thing,

Unknown Speaker  55:25  
for sure. And you're working on, like, you know, from a psycho spiritual level, it's you're utilizing energy of the body, energy of like, Transpersonal space, collective space. What's the story that you're telling with your book?

Unknown Speaker  55:41  
The story I'm telling is basically just what happened. It's basically saying among all the psychedelics that we have on the table today and all of the experiences that people are cultivating today, this is one person's experience with one psychedelic used in a very specific manner. It's a extreme in certain ways. And so, you know it, I think I drilled an unusually deep bore hole in the universe. But I didn't explore a lot of the levels that I was moving through. I just went very deep and very far. And so

Unknown Speaker  56:20  
the story is basically when I was always sort of falling back and thinking, Oh, my God, how can I, how can I tell him this? How can I I know it's a radical story, and therefore I know it's, it's, it's a challenging story to absorb, and it was a challenging story to write. But in the end, I always fell back on, just tell them the truth. Tell them what happened. No judgments. Let them do with it what they will just as best as you can tell them what happened. And towards the end of my sessions, the universe just asked me. It said, Let them see me as you've seen me. That's all. They'll know what to do with it. They'll know whether it fits or doesn't fit them. Let them see what you have seen, and that's it. I'm not really trying to do anything else. Did you write much of it during the course of these experiences in terms of the app, like the integration process, or was it reflections, looking back? Reflection looking back? I basically had all my sessions were recorded within 24 hours. So I had about 400 pages of session notes which I had studied and blocked and, you know, and I took them apart and put them back together again, and I diagrammed them in different ways,

Unknown Speaker  57:33  
but basically it took years for me to finally kind of piece together what is the storyline, and also what to leave out and what to include? So I left out a lot of the personal stuff. I left out the personal healings. I left out a lot of the personal small things, because those were not the important parts. You know, everybody has a personal story, but it's when, to me, as a philosopher, it's when the process takes you beyond the personal psyche into the deep waters of the psyche, that's when the philosophically interesting story begins. Now, the therapist story is an important story the healing of the personal psyche. That's a really important story and an important work. That's just not the story that I'm telling, I'm telling the story of a love affair with the universe and a love affair with the intelligence of the universe. And that's why I call my name for this intelligence that I engaged as my beloved. It's

Unknown Speaker  58:34  
just my beloved, because it activates such profound love in your being to engage that, to dissolve into that. That's your it's the most intimate kind of

Unknown Speaker  58:47  
true, becoming one to a pre existing one. It's a love affair. It's it. I wish it were not a love affair, but an abiding marriage, and maybe one day it will be. But working with these are temporary states. They're not permanent states. You have to come to terms with that temporalness, but they're temporary states. So it very much is like an affair. You enter, you make love in some way, and then you come back and you try to live it as best you can, inside time and space

Unknown Speaker  59:22  
for so listeners are not going to be able to see my face, but my I'm My face hurts from smiling, and my heart feels like, like it's exploding. I mean, I love this love, and I think it's, I think it's a really healing love. And as somebody who does work with the individual psyche, and you know, in our initial conversations, you're like, Well, I'm not working on that, like part of this conversation. And for me, you're really contributing to this part of the conversation, and I'm incredibly grateful to share your voice, your wisdom, your experience with my community. So deep, deep gratitude.

Unknown Speaker  1:00:00  
Tuned and reverence for for you and your time and your wisdom. Thank you. It's a joy to share, and my hope is that you know in some way, my story or my experiences will support you and all the other people in their story and their experiences. They'll know what to do with it. They'll know what to take from it. We all have different journeys, but in the end, we're all in this arm in arm. We're all in this together, you know. So everything you do, everything I do, all it, reaches out into the larger collective network, every morning, every day, every minute. So yeah, it's a joy to be of use to people I feel the same.

Unknown Speaker  1:00:48  
Thank you for listening to this episode of embodied life, the podcast. You can learn more on my website, www.embodiedlife.com

Unknown Speaker  1:01:00  
and stay connected with me on my instagram at Lauren dot Taos, I look forward to sharing lots more with you, So stay tuned for more inspiring in body conversation.

Unknown Speaker  1:01:22  
You ding.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
