Bas de Cock  0:01  
Thank you all for joining. I will give a short outline of tonight that you know we have two and a half hours together, which is a great amount of time, and you will see the time will pass as fast as you entered now. So tonight, we start with an achievement and meditation to just settle in with the theme we, yeah, we just program for this, for this wisdom, keep us gathering. And of course, we're gonna, we're gonna look ahead to the upcoming hour to hour and a half with Chris and Duane. So what are their backgrounds and why they're here? And you're gonna see they're coming from two different angles, two different perspective, two different paradigms, I would say. And this is a beautiful dance we're going to encounter. What are the possibilities, especially creating a new mindset as humans, a mindset of the whole universe. Because it's not about the technological evolution of the world leaders. You're going to create a diminishing of greenhouse gasses. You're going to drive your electric car. You're going to put more trees in the ground. You are more kind to your neighbors, where that's the start, where the mindset starts. And after an hour and a half a dance with Chris and Duane sounds like music in my ears. We have the last 45 minutes, half an hour, to look ahead for creating more circles as a as a community, as a human family, to create and to practice this new mindset. So we're gonna we're gonna guide you through this step by step, and please sit in your comfortable chair. Have a good evening. And before we start, I would like you to close your eyes, trust us as hosts, we're good people. We came with a good mission. And ask you the question, so why are you here tonight? What's your real intention of your presence during this gathering with Dwayne Chris and all this human family.

Bas de Cock  3:00  
Are you here out of curiosity? Are you here to learn? Are you here to thrive?

Bas de Cock  3:10  
Whatever your attention is doesn't matter or really sense, the reason why you're here that's already in here in this moment,

Bas de Cock  3:34  
visualize your intention for this evening as if

Speaker 1  3:40  
it's the present time.

Bas de Cock  3:56  
What's your contribution to this beautiful world we're living in.

Bas de Cock  4:06  
What do you sense from your core, from your heart, why you're here to contribute as a whole, as a whole human family?

Bas de Cock  4:28  
And if you have a

Bas de Cock  4:35  
deeper understanding why you contributed tonight, then try to remember this for the rest of the evening,

Bas de Cock  4:48  
and please feel guided from a meditation we're going to start now.

Bas de Cock  5:01  
And before we start this meditation, take some deep breaths,

Bas de Cock  5:10  
just to settle in to

Bas de Cock  5:24  
you allow yourself to open up to this visualization. I'm going to guide it now for you

Bas de Cock  5:37  
sense that you are floating. In a galaxy, and you have a clear and bright view on Mother Earth, it

Speaker 1  6:00  
feels at home

Bas de Cock  6:03  
floating in this universe and seeing our common ground, Mother Earth,

Bas de Cock  6:15  
you Feel at peace and deeply connected to this beautiful planet in a sky full of stars,

Bas de Cock  6:32  
you can deeply feel you made this journey before, And now you feel so grateful to see Planet Earth from this perspective again,

Speaker 1  6:51  
excitement,

Bas de Cock  6:54  
ecstasy And tears of joy are felt over in this privacy present moment,

Bas de Cock  7:08  
you feel a pool of Mother Earth pulling you towards her body, and

Bas de Cock  7:21  
you can sharply feel and see all the continents and the oceans of Mother Earth coming into your view,

Bas de Cock  7:37  
pulled more closely, you have a clear view on your own continent.

Bas de Cock  7:48  
You see your country, where you live, you see more sharply your province,

Bas de Cock  7:58  
and you zoomed in to your own city. You can feel your neighborhood, your neighborhood, you know so well,

Bas de Cock  8:17  
instantly you see your house. And the interiors of your house, the inside the furniture, and you see your loved ones sitting in your beautiful house.

Bas de Cock  8:40  
And then you sense your back in your body. You can feel your skin.

Bas de Cock  8:52  
You can feel your organs. You're in your bones. You are aware of your breath.

Bas de Cock  9:03  
You are aware of the heartbeat of your beautiful heart, you feel instantly at home, the same feeling when you watched Mother Earth From above,

Speaker 1  9:29  
what a journey, a journey

Bas de Cock  9:36  
from beyond. You

Speaker 2  9:53  
nothing lasts forever. No one lives forever. You. A flower that fades and dies, winter passes and spring comes embrace the cycle of life that is the greatest love.

Speaker 2  10:11  
Go beyond fear. Go beyond fear. Beyond fear takes you into the place where love grows

Speaker 2  10:27  
when you refuse to follow the impulses of fear, anger and revenge beyond means to feel yourself start every day singing like the birds. Singing takes you beyond, beyond, beyond beyond. We need a repeated discipline, a genuine training to let go our old habits of mind and to find and sustain a new way of seeing go beyond the rights and the wrongs. Prayer clears the head and brings back peace to the soul. Go beyond to feel the oneness of the unity.

Speaker 3  11:30  
Sing, singing, take you beyond. Beyond. Go beyond.

Speaker 2  11:43  
We are all the same, all the same, looking to find our way back to the source, to the one, to the only one. Go beyond revenge. Greatest moment in our lives is when we allow us to teach each other go beyond, to feel the oneness of the unity singing. Singing takes you beyond, beyond, beyond. Beyond.

Speaker 2  12:25  
Take the journey. Take the journey inside of you, to become quiet, to hear the beyond,

Speaker 2  12:37  
to become patient, to receive the beyond, to become open, to invite the Beyond and be grateful. Be grateful, to allow the beyond be in the present moment, to live in the beyond. Start every day, singing like the birds, singing takes you beyond, beyond, beyond. What does love have to do with it? Love grows when you trust, when you trust, love heals and renews. Love inspires and empowers us to do great things and makes us a better person to love. Love makes us feel safe and brings us closer to God.

Unknown Speaker  13:33  
When you go beyond,

Speaker 2  13:36  
is where you find True Love.

Speaker 3  13:39  
Keep singing. Singing takes you beyond. Beyond.

Bas de Cock  14:07  
You make connection to your breath again, deep in your breath,

Bas de Cock  14:20  
and take your own time to open up your eyes and going external

Bas de Cock  14:28  
to all people who joined this gathering, feel free to make some contact with the people. Look at the thumbnails the faces and before we gonna introduce Chris and Dewayne, I want to thank you for all the donations. There are a beautiful amount of the donations done as a gift for the choosing life project and. We're gonna hear, hear more about it from from Dwayne, I think so. Thank you for that. And I also want to take a moment to introduce mayo, my co host during the wisdom keepers every month. And I want to say that also Melanie is one of the hosts, but she can't contribute tonight because she has a course running. So mayo, before we go to Dwayne and Chris and we're going to open up, please feel free to share something from your side. Dwayne, your microphone is still off,

Speaker 4  15:50  
everyone. Thank you so much for taking the time, for being here with us. Can you hear me now?

Bas de Cock  15:56  
Fantastic.

Speaker 4  15:57  
It is so important to have these conversations within ourselves, but imagine the power of sharing our ideas and connecting from a human stance. And these conversations, although they're mediated through this platform, right a technology that is provided us the sense of community, even though we may be continents away or as bosses, beautiful depiction of our neighborhood, in our house and wherever we may be, this what we are doing and what we just did through that guided meditation is truly beyond it is combining our energies into one essence, into this consciousness. So it is so important to have this meeting, to have more conversations in your neighborhoods with those around you, so you can share your reality and how we can co create that reality together. So thank you so much for being here. We look forward to growing with you, to having perhaps a meeting that is face to face one day a wisdom keepers face to face. But for now, let's sit tight and enjoy the ride. Tonight's competitions are going to be very much expanding our universe into what we can do as human beings here, now and today, so that we can come together as one species in order for us to thrive as a whole. So thank you so much for being here taking the time.

Speaker 1  17:25  
Thank you, Maya.

Bas de Cock  17:28  
Yes, before we gonna start with Chris and Duane, and we're gonna introduce them, of course, and I'm gonna also highlight why we are here together, also with Chris and Dwayne, I invite you if you have the feeling you want to write something down, something like a question, something like something coming up, an emotion, or something you feel in your system, you want to write it down. Feel comfortable to do so. It's handy. The second part of the wisdom keepers gathering, that we have a Q, a and a sharing part, where these things can be shared, and feel open to do so, and feel that this environment is reliable and you can trust this environment. So we're here with a good heart. That's what I want to say. We were going to see if we're going to use a whiteboard to share all our information or to have more, like an integration of the things coming up, and we're just going to feel organically if this is going to happen. So if I'm going to show up a whiteboard, I'm going to explain how we're going to use the whiteboard, but we're going to see, okay, before this idea of asking initially, Chris and afterwards, Dwayne came up as well, in my mind, in our minds, and It's, it's a beautiful coincidence, they're both at this gathering, and would like to introduce them, both from from the heart and from perspective, but I want to say something personal, because since I started, I'm a background medical doctor, an ENT doctor, trained an ENT doctor, and then I'm more like opening up, which is, I think, more like a calling into into life, more in integrative medicine. And now I'm into the Grof legacy training for Transpersonal psychology and psychedelic therapy. And that's where I met Chris. Chris, I was at your beautiful course from the shift network, LSD in the mind of universe, and it opened something up about how we going to take care of this planet and of this universe, because it's all integrated and it's all it's a one life. System, or one whole world system. So that's thank you for that. That's what I want to share personally, and it until now and after my own psychedelic experiences, it's getting deeper and deeper, and feels like we're creating a tribe where these important things can be shared, but it's creating a mind shift by itself. So thank you for that, and maybe it's it's beautiful to start with you, Chris, because the initial outreach was via email to you, and then Dewayne came in, Chris, you're a professor emeritus in the department of philosophy and religious study, and you're specialized in Buddhistic studies of the Youngstown State University. But you're also related to the California Institute of integral studies and also in the Advisory Council of my training, Grof legacy training. And then you're also related to the Institute of Noetic Sciences. So you're you're not retired or emeritus professor at all. You're full alive and contributing to the mind shift which is which is happening. You're an author of several books, the latest. It's on my desk every day. And I would really recommend, if you're not in LSD, or you're not in psychedelics, you have to read it because it's it's very much important information, which is in the book. You wrote, several books, I'm not going to highlight them all, but LSD, in the mind of the universe, your latest book, and for me, was transformative. So thank you for that. And in this book, you described your empirical research. You did it on your own with your former wife, with 76 deep, high dose LSD sessions in which you entered the non other narrative states of consciousness and you encountered a vision of our impending global crisis and also the birth of the future human. So these visions are of importance, because this come from a field which we are not so much aware of. This is beautiful information. So thank you for being here, and thank you for contributing to to this gallery. It's a pleasure to be here boss and then Dwayne during the course of Chris LSD, in the mind of the universe, you already mentioned Chris Dwayne's work, and after the course, I went through it. And your last book, Dwayne choosing Earth, was mind blowing for me. It's so full of information. And you're an author of several books which are all important for us humans, but choosing Earth. And you can find in the chat box already the link to choosing Earth website and also the book, and you can just download it by PDF. So thank you for that, and thank you for opening up Dwayne in the early 70s. You worked as a senior staff of the member of the Presidential congressional commission on the American future of Yeah, of the last 30 years of the last century. So the 70s until 2000 an important position. And you were also acknowledged for this deep work as a social visionary exploring the deeper trends that are transforming our world. And you were recognized for this for an international award, a Peace Award, a recognition of this, this global vision and consciousness of lifestyle that contributes to a more sustainable and spiritual culture. So it's an honor having you here. I would like to open up the field for you both to start with our Yeah, main question of the evening, how can we create, as humans, a new mindset, which transforms our global crisis? Or can we, can we transform the global crisis? Or have, do we have to go through it with a new mindset. So can we start from there, and then we'll see how the dance will evolve. Thank you for being here. You both.

Chris Bache  24:52  
It's a pleasure to be here, everyone. Baz, thank you for the invitation. You hear my voice is a little rough. I've just. Him down with the cold. I wouldn't have canceled, except this material is just too important to let go of the opportunity to talk about and I wouldn't pass up an opportunity to talk with Dwayne. I'd have to be near dead to pass up this opportunity. We've been friends for over 20 years, 25 years now, and it was first our research and our writing which brought us together, but then, as we got to know each other personally and understood the human being behind the research, the friendship has just deepened into a deep, lifelong brotherhood. Now, how Duane and I have thought about today is basically, first of all, I want to say a talk is just an opportunity to get to the Q and A, because the Q and A is where the juice really is. And I'm really looking forward to that that part of our discussion. And I know Dwayne is too, but in terms of the talk, we see this is basically a conversation, an opportunity for Duane and I just to sink into conversation and have the kind of conversation that we have sometimes when we get together. And so I thought we might begin by just kind of affirming some common ground that Dwayne and I share first, I'm a philosopher of religion. I've been an academic all my life in Northeast Ohio. Duane is a social activist, a visionary social activist. We've both written books. We've both been completely committed to our lives project, and we both share coming at it through overlapping means. We both share, I think, a common vision of the universe that can be reached intellectually and can be reached experientially. And that is a vision of the universe that is saturated with intelligence, orders and orders and orders of intelligence, and also the intelligence behind the manifest universe, the intelligence out of which the universe sprang in the Big Bang and continues to unfold and be nourished by this fertile ground of existence. This is Common Ground for Duane and I also common ground is the sense that our is our nature, our consciousness. If you just sit quietly, or if you amplify consciousness, if you sink into consciousness, you sink into your personal unconsciousness. And then you sink into what Jung called the collective unconscious. And if you just keep going, you sink eventually into a level, levels of consciousness so deep they go beyond the species. They go beyond time and space, and one can enter into deep communion with, I think, what both of us think of as the mind of the universe, both the manifest universe and the universe behind the manifest universe. And Dean and I both share the conviction that this intelligence is profoundly wise. He asked me, before we got started, how would you describe the IQ of the universe? Boy, that was that stumped me for a bit, and I had to think in terms of an IQ on order of millions and billions. Because, I mean, look at this. Is the intelligence which has manifested everything we see around us, as far as we can see and as deep as we can see. How could we possibly measure the depth of that, of that

Bas de Cock  28:40  
intelligence?

Chris Bache  28:42  
And compassion, and that's a kind of get to the tricky point part, because it's easy enough to see the the intelligence. When we just look at DNA and we look at the structure of stars and galaxies, we can see layers and layers of intelligence manifesting, but compassion on the surface, life is hard. Life is and one could easily conclude, and I understand you could conclude, that life is basically generated by a mean son of a bitch. I mean, it hurts us so much. It just hurts so terribly. And in order to see the wisdom of the universe and to see the compassion behind this, the hard conditions in which we live, you have to look very deep. You have to look much deeper than sensory consciousness. You have to much deeper than the workings of the personal and collective psyche. You really must look very, very deep, deeply. I think it was Ramakrishna, when he was asked, when he said, once, in order to see God, you must be willing to look evil in the face, and in order to see the wisdom. Wisdom of the universe, you must be willing to sit deeply with the pain of existence. And there's nothing Dwayne or I will say today that would dilute, set aside sublimate, or in any way sidestep the deep suffering that it takes to live fully an embodied, spiritual existence, right? So this is just a warm up exercise, and I want to do is toss it to Dwayne, and we're going to toss it back and forth, and then we're going to move towards this topic of the times that we're living in, the crisis, that we are coming into the depth of that crisis, and what we might do to move through this crisis with courage and to actually accelerate our way through it, so we can get through it with in with intelligence and with compassion and exploring what the universe wants of humanity at this hour, what humanity what the universe is inviting humanity to become. Because both of us share the vision that we are coming to a trigger point, a triggering point. We are coming to a bifurcation point where humanity either makes the next step in its long evolutionary journey, or we probably go extinct because we can't survive on this planet in these conditions, staying at the level of consciousness that has brought us here. We either grow up, as Dwayne says, or we die, and that means this extinction or potential extinction, is an enormous evolutionary accelerator. So with that, let me hand it over to my brother, Dwayne.

Duane Elgin  32:00  
Thank you, brother, Chris. Chris is one of my dearest, dearest brothers and friends, and I am so grateful for the lifelong the journey that we have shared with our mutual interest depth looking at the nature of the universe and where that is leading us as we move into this dangerous and transformative time for humanity and creative time and the passions that are present are really compassions. The presence of suffering in the world as a catalyst for our pushing back on ourselves and awakening freshly to where we are and where we might be going from here. So I appreciated boss saying that he was a doctor by training, and early on in my life I was going to become a doctor, but I encountered the violence of the Vietnam era, and I shifted over a period of time, from physical healing to now social healing, and that's one theme I would really like To explore, and underneath the social healing is our connection with the aliveness of a living universe. And that is where Chris and I have found common ground and common passion in our mutual explorations of that possibility, that reality. So let's, let's begin.

Chris Bache  33:42  
Chris, right. Where do you want to start? Dig in?

Duane Elgin  33:45  
Well, I think it's important just to acknowledge where we are right now, that the crisis of transition isn't something that's in the future. It is happening right now. The head of the United Nations recently said, humanity is on a climate Highway to Hell. We're on a climate Highway to Hell, and that's just looking at the climate crisis. We're also on a an extraordinary path of extincting a huge proportion of the plant and animal species on this earth. It's estimated by the end of this century, a million species, different species, a million species will be extinct. We're impoverishing the earth right now. It's extraordinary. We're also in a time of overshoot, we're way overshooting the resource base of the earth. We can't continue as we have. It's estimated that the earth will carry roughly 2 billion people into the far future, and right now, we have 8 billion people. So if we. We take that to heart. It means that we're roughly 6 billion people over the carrying capacity of the earth. And so we are in for a rough ride, a rough initiation, if you will, moving from our current condition of overshoot and collapse, the extinction of species, the climate catastrophe, resource depletion and all the rest, and come to some new healing and some new healthy relationship with the earth and and our ability to live into the far future.

Chris Bache  35:34  
So that's a Yeah. Let me ask you a question that I know is on people's mind, and I know your answer to it, I suspect. But the question is this, can we avoid this crisis now, if we really get off our butt and mobilize, can we stop what's happening and bring this under control? What do you think?

Duane Elgin  35:54  
No, it's too late. Had we started a half century ago when I began my research on all of this, in the early 1970s there was an opportunity that time to pull back, take a look at where we were headed, and choose a new pathway. But we have used up that half century to just consume ourselves into a corner, if you will. And so now we're up against it, and we do have the forces, the factors that I was just mentioning, overshoot of the Earth's resource base, a climate catastrophe that's growing, species being extincted at an extraordinary rate, and so on and so on. Now is the time for our decision. Now is the time for choice. And so this is where we're looking at at this, not as theoretically in the far future, but as right now we're up against it and and now is the time for a new understanding of who we are. Where are we? Who are we? Where are we going from here? Those are the core things we need to begin digging into now, not only philosophically, but But practically, realistically as a species. So let's begin that inquiry.

Chris Bache  37:17  
Yeah, so the depth of destabilization that's coming at us has already started. We see a deep unraveling in many areas of the social fabric. We see our political discourse becoming increasingly polarized. We're moving in the direction of fascism on one side, totalitarianism on other sides, repression of discourse, denial of facts, of science, it's getting harder and harder to assume any kind of common ground, which are all symptoms, I think, of the fact that the ground is shifting out from underneath our feet. It's like we're in a slow moving earthquake that's building up year by year, and it's just shaking our systems to its foundations. And if you're if you just look at the research, as Dwayne has done, and many of you have done, if you look at the research, you can just see that the foundations of our culture are just going are shaking, beginning to shake more and more, and we're going to live through this, our generation, my children's generation, your children's generation, your grandchildren's generation. It will still be deepening during these decades ahead. It's hard to envision just how bad it's going to get. When I think about this, my heart explodes with pain. Everyone I sit with who really looks hard at the data, their heart explodes in pain, and they would do anything to not have to go through this. But this is what we're this is what we're going into and that means, I think it's particularly important that we understand what is happening that because if we don't understand this at a deep structural level, if we don't understand the evolutionary challenge that we're facing, we're going to give way to despair. We're going to give way to theodicies, which are which are really deeply demonic and problematic, we're going to give way to political, destructive philosophies. So we have to understand this deeply. Pass it to you, brother, yes.

Duane Elgin  39:34  
Okay, here's what I have encountered over the last, oh, roughly 40 years speaking to people around the Earth, and often, before I give a talk, I will ask an audience one simple question. And the question is this, if you look at the entire human family and you look at our behaviors, what is the life stage of the human family? Being expressed by those behaviors, and I give the audience four possibilities. One, that we're behaving like toddlers. Two, that we're behaving like teenagers, like adolescents. Three, that we're behaving like early adults, and four, like elders. Four possibilities, toddlers, teenagers, adults or elders. And I've asked this, and I've been very surprised that around the Earth, it doesn't matter who I speak with. It might be a church group, it might be a college audience, it might be a business community, and so on. It doesn't matter. One response comes back again and again and again. Roughly three quarters of every audience I've spoken to over decades has one response, and they say we're behaving like adolescents and like teenagers. There's no hesitation regarding that, that answer. And so if we are in our adolescent stage as a species, what will it take us to move then into our early adulthood? And in many ways, that's what we're looking at right now, the fire of initiation that will push us into a new sense of ourselves, a new sense of the universe in which we live, and a new sense, importantly, of the evolutionary journey in which we're involved. So that is one key framing for me. It's that we're in a rite of passage. It's a time of initiation of our species, and all the suffering, all the pain that we're experiencing right now as a part of that pain that every adolescent as an individual goes through in different ways, but nonetheless, we don't move into early adulthood without going through the fire of initiation. And so Okay, let's accept that that is how evolution works. We are pushed outside of the nest of our comfort zone and into this transforming future, and it's an extraordinary future that lies before us, and without a sense of where we might be going, we're going to be reluctant to go there. So one thing that I appreciate about Chris and his look at his exploration of the birth of the future human, and my own work, that's what we're looking at. What is the maturation of the species, about where does that take us in terms of our relationship with the universe, our relationship with other humans, our relationship deeply within ourselves? So that's a conversation that Chris and I have had again and again over the years. So clear, Chris,

Chris Bache  42:44  
your turn. Well, to give a deeper context to Dwayne's observations, I want to point to his second book, awakening Earth, where he describes the the the stages of human evolution in terms of the conscious capacity, so the levels of consciousness that human beings have evolved over our long evolutionary story. And I think if I have this right, Dewayne, you correct me. You say in the book, and by the way, if you get the book, read the book, start at the Epilog. Read the Epilog first and then read the book, because the Epilog gives you the experiential insight into where the book came from. But late in the book, he says we could go through these last three evolutionary stages in as little as 500 years, and given that we're talking about 10s and hundreds of 1000s of years leading up to that point we're talking about that would represent an enormous acceleration, an exponential acceleration, that we're entering into so very intense, but exponentially sped up. Yes, Duane,

Duane Elgin  43:59  
indeed, we're moving into a time, obviously, of intense compression. This is going to be heated journey, a heated compression of humanity in the fire of initiation that we're already beginning to experience right now as we look beyond our nation state boundaries to the earth as a whole system, and we're seeing this will not hold this will not carry us even to the end of this century. So we are in compression times, and we are going to be pushed outside of our usual circumstances and into new conditions as a species, not simply as nations, but as a species as a whole. And that's already beginning to happen right now, and so that will be the catalyst, I think, for rapid acceleration of the evolutionary potentials that are already so. Surfacing, and this gathering is one expression of that the role of psychedelics, for example, in being a catalyst for awakening us to a new domain of understanding of ourselves and the human journey. So here we go as a species, into the fire and into the initiation and hopefully into our higher humanity.

Chris Bache  45:25  
Yeah. And in that context, I want to put on the table one fundamental axiom of my thought. I know Dwayne shares this axiom, and I suspect probably everyone in this group does too, and that's the concept of reincarnation. And so this was my first book on which I chose to write on reincarnation, starting with the empirical evidence, which I believe is just overwhelming. And I came to this conclusion as a philosopher of religion. So when I look at the world and I see human beings, I don't see them the way that most people see them. I don't see old people as old people and young people as young people. I tend to see souls. And there are old souls in small, young bodies, and there are young souls in old, withered bodies. But the important key here is understanding that evolution, that reincarnation is is a higher order of evolution. It's one of the fundamental truths of an self, manifesting, self, evolving universe. And so far, we've been telling the story of of reincarnation, saturated by the perspective of theologies and philosophies which have been individually oriented. So we tell the story of reincarnation terms of individual evolution, the soul's evolution over countless lifetimes, the soul's awakening eventually into individual enlightenment, but it's basically been strapped to a metaphysics which focuses on individual individual human beings. And that's not that that's false. I think that's really true, but we're missing something deeply if we think, if we stop there, when we understand that not just we and everyone we see around us is evolving, but every human being on the planet is a reincarnating essence, then we begin to understand that reincarnation is a collective driver. It is not just an individual driver. It's not just about personal salvation or personal transformation. It is an evolutionary driver of the highest magnitude. And I'll shift just for a second and say, if you ever read my book, diamonds from heaven, or as the publisher named it, LSD, in the mind of the universe, there's a section there where I report, I record the experiences that kept opening up and tearing me Open and showing me the entire universe, the entire species pulsing in and out of time space every 100 years or so, just the entire species pulsing and evolving together all of our individual karmic agendas being woven skillfully, intelligently into a collective karmic agenda, and the collective karmic agenda be informing all of our individual karmic agenda, so that it became impossible to separate the evolution of the individual and the evolution of the collective. And that became one of the fundamental core themes of my second book, dark night, early dawn, where I'm talking about the dark night out of the individual soul of the end of you know, the dark night that the mystic goes through before spiritual awakening, but the dark night of our collective soul. So that we I began to understand from my sessions that all of our individual work serves not only our individual development, but it also serves directly, immediately, our collective development. And there are no such things as personal problems which are not also collective problems. Try and think of one. Think of any personal issue that we may be dealing with, and try to find one that isn't echoed or reflective of a collective issue in our culture. So I'll just pause there. Hand it back to you. Duane, Well, Chris,

Duane Elgin  49:37  
Chris held up a book or two. I, you know, I can't let that just pass without holding up one of my own and it relates very directly to what Chris is speaking about right now that a reincarnational perspective. How can that happen? Well, here's a book that I worked on for 30 years, the living universe, the. Universe, according to modern science, and I have encountered this so many times, is it considered non living at the foundations, dead at the foundations. And as far as modern consumer society is concerned, it's all just dead matter and empty space. And people like Chris Bache come along and they say, Wait a minute. No, I've, I've explored the deeper reaches of the universe. It's a living system. In that living system, life can re connect with itself. It can evolve with itself, and reincarnation, then is is not losing the thread of our existence as we move through multiple cycles of life in this larger aliveness. So we can, after a bit, maybe begin to explore the foundations of a living universe and that perspective. But I want to give Chris a chance to perhaps integrate that connect the Living Universe with the evolution of life through that living system.

Chris Bache  51:12  
Well, in that context, I just want to sort of say something which is hard and consoling at the same time, and that is from a reincarnation perspective, we're always popping into time space. And we pop out of time space into a spiritual meta universe. We pop back into time space. We pop out of time space. And from this perspective, what is death? And all of the Enlightenment traditions, all of the you know the the awakening, spiritual awakening traditions basically say the same thing, birth is not the beginning of our life. Look carefully, and you will find in your being, in your physical body and in your mind, the evidence of a range of experience that far predates your physical body. Death is not the end of our existence, because we now, and particularly if you study with people like Michael Newton and his work in life, between life and past life therapy, we have an abundance of evidence that there is a continuity of consciousness that predates us and postdates our individual life that we so when we talk about the deaths that are coming, I mean, we have to really relate to it at two levels, and both of them are fundamentally true, and to diminish either of them, I think, would diminish the truth of our situation. One of them is the death of a human being is a painful, horrendous, terrible experience. We are ending a life cycle. Every death is the ending of a precious cycle of life, and that hurts like hell. And in another perspective, we can also say that in a deeper perspective, no one dies, cycles end, cycles begin, but the consciousness which is alive within that organism, within that being is not extinguished, but simply paused. While we go home, we recalibrate, refresh, rejuvenate, and then we enter back into the fray. So this is, on the one hand, consoling, because it tells us that death is not the end. On the other hand, if you look at it really carefully, it means that this pattern of leaving our loved ones behind and coming back into new configurations and leaving and coming back into new configurations, this very difficult and demanding dynamic of constantly shredding, in some ways, the social fabric, the family fabric, our individual fabric, is part of the ways that way that life works. We have to look deeply to understand. And when we look deeply, we begin to sort of see that the universe thinks in very different terms, and we do. It thinks on a time frame much, much larger than we do. It just thinks on a scale, a completely higher order of scale. We have to learn to think as we have to learn to think like a mountain. We have to learn to think like the universe. We have to learn to really kind of think large and think deep and look at every human being we see as a precious soul who is a companion on this long journey, whatever our short term relationship with them are underneath we stand together in this long evolutionary trajectory, working for the collective good of our planet, of an entire human family, and if people. I don't have this commitment to the human family if they have only a commitment to their own personal life or the even their own personal family. Understandable, but I feel sorry for them at a deeper level, because to be committed to something large is to is to activate and to acknowledge that in ourselves, which is large,

Bas de Cock  55:24  
and therefore to be committed

Chris Bache  55:28  
to your species, to be committed to your generation, to be committed to the planet, to be committed to the other forms of life that share this planet with us. These are an expression of a maturing soul. A young soul is small, right? A maturing soul is large. When we look at Gandhi, Martin Luther King, great souls, which hold large swaths of humanity in their heart, thus are the symptoms of a maturing soul. Great gwayne,

Duane Elgin  56:03  
well, so well said, Chris, that's a part of growing up a maturing soul is to grow into the reality that we do have a soul, and to keep the fire in the soul alive so that we can grow into this future that you're speaking about, and I I've often wondered, why doesn't the larger world recognize what we're speaking about right here? This is the wisdom that's known through history and and across cultures. Where is that wisdom today, and you know, I'm reminded from the American Indian tradition of three miracles. This helps to reveal this. The first miracle is that anything exists at all. Anything exists at all. That's a miracle. The second miracle is that living things exist, like plants and animals. And the third miracle is that living things exist that know they exist and that have the capacity to explore the nature of that existence. Now we tend to get so enamored with the third miracle that's that really elevates our capacities as a species, and we tend to then forget the first miracle that anything is here at all. And one thing I appreciate about what Chris is doing with his life and his journey is not only speaking and learning about reincarnation and the individual soul and our and our movement through time, but also the nature of the universe that would carry that process, the first miracle, and one thing that we love to explore is the nature of the first miracle, that the universe is itself a living system and And we are beginning the the the evolutionary journey of learning how to live in that larger aliveness. Now that's an extraordinary transition from living in a Dead universe, and it's really dead matter, empty space. Well, what do we have here? Nothing more than our physical body, a bit of biological aliveness. It's here for a short time. Well, what do we do with that emphasis short Well, we consume as much as we can to get as much pleasure as we can for a short while before we're thrown into the mystery of non existence. Chris is talking about a different journey. He's saying, wait a minute. Wait a minute. We're alive. We're deeply alive. The universe is a living system we're moving through that larger aliveness. And what we're trying to do here is move beyond the consumer society that's over consuming the earth, move into a greater wisdom that says, Look at who you are. Sure you are a physical body. But beyond the physical body is the Body of Consciousness that lives in our living universe. And that's who you are, more deeply, more profoundly. And by growing into that, whether we encounter that aliveness through the psychedelic journey, the meditative journey and so on, that is who we are at a more foundational level. And that is what Chris is pointing to, and that is what I am working with, as well with my own life.

Chris Bache  59:28  
Yeah, you're pointing to me, Dwayne. But you know, come on, brother, you wrote the book The Living Universe. You're the one who really, really spent all those years looking at the scientific evidence, trying to marshal the kind of evidence that would convince my atheistic philosophy department, where they just reject all of this out of hand, because they're committed to a materialist perspective, and I'm presenting them evidence for reincarnation, they're saying, oh, that's nonsense, because we know it all reduces to brain, and we know where that comes from, and you know you're the one. Who took that on and you just laid out and just hammer the evidence and the evidence, and then also drawing upon cross cultural testimony from multiple continents that are basically testifying that to the deeper mystery, to the deeper intelligence, which we can experience. Yeah, that's what my philosophical colleagues. You know, they're so skeptical about who experience, no, no, no. But come on, I say, let's get serious. A philosophical revolution begins with the question, what is it possible for a human being to experience, right? Yeah, yes. They're telling me you can't experience the things you say you're experiencing, and I'm telling them bullshit. Come on. I got we have a method. We have hundreds and hundreds of 1000s of people who have used this method. Have done LSD psychotherapy. We've pushed these boundaries. We have long now longitudinal studies that are showing us what happens when people do these things. You can't dismiss that and say, Oh, no, that couldn't be real, because my metaphysical view says matter is the only reality, and you're talking about things that are not materially

Bas de Cock  1:01:12  
based, right?

Chris Bache  1:01:14  
Yes, you know you're knocking on their door hard, brother,

Duane Elgin  1:01:20  
I want to bring in look. Let's look beyond philosophy. Yes, Kali, that's thinking a lot, Chris, let's look at the direct experience. Now, the psychedelic experience is direct. It's immediate. You don't think about it. You're just overwhelmed with the direct experience and encounter with life in a different way, in a different mode or different manner. And so let me share just briefly my experience in Parapsychology almost half a century ago, the US government began the very first research by the government into psychic so called psychic potentials, and to me, they're not I don't like the word psychic. I like the word it's alive. And to what extent can we relate to and experience the aliveness of the Living Universe, and what does that reveal to us? And there were two things that came back after three years of involvement in in depth research there at the Engineering Laboratory of the Sanford Research Institute. So I had the extraordinary opportunity, just extraordinary for over a three year period funded by NASA, the space agency, to begin to explore our intuitive capacities. And they wanted to know. They said, Look, if there's an astronaut on the far side of the moon, is there any way to intuitively understand their situation? Can our intuition reach behind the far side of the moon and get valuable and meaningful information about their condition. Well, that was the premise that launched this three years of inquiry, that after three years, I dropped out because it was taken over by the CIA, because it was so compelling the information coming back that it was taken over by the Central Intelligence Agency, and it continued for another 20 years. So but in the first three years, it was public information, and here's what was learned from that. First is that there are two aspects to our intuitive potentials, one that we can receive information way beyond what we can reach through our normal perceptual capacities of the physical body. And then secondly, we can extend our energetic impact on the universe way beyond the close in reach of our of our body as well. And so the receptive side was what is sometimes called remote viewing, and that was interesting. But the expressive side, which is sometimes called psychokinesis of mind, manifesting in matter, really took me into the realm of a living universe, and exploring the ecology of the living universe and how we can do a dance with that universe and and expands ourselves to our really are the larger selves that we actually inhabit. And so we have a physical body, but that body is a an anchor for an unbounded awareness, an unbounded consciousness that reaches out without bound, into the larger universe and beyond. And so we are bounded for a short while. Then, as Chris has mentioned, that boundary gives way. We, the body dies, but the consciousness that was carried along through the body does not it migrates. It moves into the into the larger realms of the universe. And I don't presume to know what where we're going with that, but I do presume to have unshakable confidence that we are learning to live in this larger aliveness, and that is the core journey that we're about right now as a species. And to the extent that we think what we're doing here is, is learning to consume more so we can be happy with the material things that we have. We're missing. We're missing what this is all about. We're you. This is a place to learn about who we are, beneath and behind and beyond the physical body, to recognize that we're a part of a journey of aliveness that, as Chris has said, has had infinitely deep origins and that has infinitely deep potential is moving into the further future.

Chris Bache  1:06:05  
Boy, do I want to jump on that hard. I want to look at this idea of as we develop our potentials, as we make this turning point as we kind of mature as a species. What kind of human being are we becoming? What are the potentials that we are activating? And I think it's far, far beyond what we are seeing even in the science fiction literature, which so much looks like cops and robbers in space, you know, software beyond the traditional pictures. But I want to hold that for a little bit, and I want to build up to that little bit, and so I'd like to up the ante in a different way. I'd like to talk more directly about psychedelics. You ready to make that pivot? Okay? Now this is something that both Dwayne and I share, and I suspect if we had a show of hands, we'd get a pretty high showing of people who have used psychedelics responsibly in this room as part of their own personal history, part of their spiritual practice history. Just as we ask people, How many people do yoga and I've done meditation, we'd have the same type of thing for our generation. Psychedelics is part of the the arsenal of spiritual of not only spiritual healing, healing the soul, but becoming more aware of what our lives are about and what life itself is about. So let me just speak personally for a minute. I was brand new professor, fresh out of graduate school, read Stan grofs work immediately I felt like I saw my life vocation in front of me. I had to do this type of work. It had been made illegal. This was 1978 right? So it had been made illegal in 1970 I loved teaching. I didn't want to lose my job, so I basically developed a sideline to my career. I was a traditional in many ways, not, I hope, not too traditional, but I was an academic. I was teaching courses at the University, sitting on committees, writing papers, doing all that stuff. But in my nighttime job, I began a systematic course of using a psychedelic protocol that I inherited from Stan Grof, totally internalized, internalized sessions, rigorous, lying down, eye shades, earphones, sitter, all that stuff. You know, you know the drill. Unwisely. I will admit now I chose a protocol after three sessions of working with very high doses of LSD, because I was in a hurry, and I thought this would get me where I wanted to go faster. I thought it was about personal awakening, personal enlightenment. Yeah, come on, they'll be harder, but I'll burn off my karma faster. Let's get there. Let's put the metal to the pedal to the metal. Let's go well, I turned out, turns out that was completely wrong on so many points. The goal was not personal enlightenment. And if you work with very, very high doses, like I did, and you do it in a controlled burn situation, in a very carefully situation, when you start shattering the boundaries. Within a few years, I was dealing with experiences where clearly, what was driving my sessions and what was driving the purification and transformational process in my sessions was not my personal development, was not my personal healing or my personal transformation, but my work had gotten sucked into a larger historical drama of our collective development, and so much of the healing that took place in my sessions Were not about healing Chris Bache or even Chris bacheous soul, but it was trying to engage and heal some aspect of the human family. And for years and years, has kept repeating itself, entering deep into pains which are stored within the collective unsight. Collective unconscious aggregates which are stored from all the wars, all the all the unhealed traumas of all the wars, and all the abuse, and all the droughts, and all the men versus women violence and race versus race, violence and so on and so forth. All of that trauma which is not resolved at the end of any one lifetime is accumulating in the human psyche. And for us to make this evolutionary pivot, we have to heal humanity. We have to heal the being which, for me, is a single being, the human species, as a single being in which we are all cells. And in order for this entire being to make the transition that Dwayne has talked about from being an adolescent stage of the soul development into a mature adult stage of soul development, we have to heal. And healing is the first step to establish a new foundation, a new platform where we can then download deeper and more mature and richer energy and light and insight from the universe itself. It's like we're we're too we're too dumb, we're too fragmented to be able to take advantage of all the wisdom and all the healing that's available to us. But as we heal this work, as we do this work, then we can take in more. We can take in we can take in more of the light of the universe. Now I mentioned that just to kind of as a preface to where we go when you start shattering the shells that hold our awareness in their fixed and narrow confirmation, we can shatter a shell, and usually the first layers of shells. People talk about ego, death, right? Death of our individual mind body experience. Then you wake up into you are reborn into a deeper level of consciousness. And if you push those boundaries, if you work steadily at those boundaries, eventually that process will do the same type of purification process. You'll hit limits, and you'll go through yet another death and rebirth. But it's not ego death repeating itself. It's a deeper kind of dying. It's a dying that takes place at the species level. It brings you the rebirth that takes place, pitches you not into your soul level of individual awakening, but into some aspect of humanity's awakening. If you continue to push hard, at least it's been my experience that if you continue this process

Bas de Cock  1:12:41  
diligently, and

Chris Bache  1:12:45  
we'll talk about what that means, maybe. But if you do this work systematically, and you really take care of your body, and I don't recommend doing it the way I did it, because it's a lot of wear and tear, if I knew then what I know now, I wouldn't do it the same way again. Please don't I'd do it differently. I'd be gentler. But if you push like this, if you keep on pushing those boundaries, you begin to enter into a communion with the intelligence that's within the species, that's driving the species, and it begins to teach you. It teaches you what's happening. It teaches you where humanity is going. Now, at this point, I'll just inject one point and I'm going to turn it over to Dwayne again, one of the things that began to happen about eight, nine years into my work, I began to have a series of visions that just were being poured into me. And I think of Black Elk when I try to talk about this, because Black Elk, when he was 12 years old, he had this visionary experience of the fate of the Lakota people, and it shook him so deeply. You know, he almost died. He was out unconscious for days and days when he came back, he was holding this vision. He was so shaken, he didn't talk about it for years. In my case, I was downloading visions of what appeared to be the fate of the human species, but it wasn't given to me all at once. It was being dropped in piece in pieces over a series of sessions stretched over years and but the fundamental teaching kept repeating itself and deepening itself. And the teaching was this, humanity is coming to a turning point. Humanity is entering a very challenging period, but a time of profound spiritual fruition. We were entering a time that would mark the beginning and end of history. It's a truly an ethical, shifting experience. We were coming into a time when we would literally begin to wake up collectively. It wasn't about just individuals. This is a species wide awakening. The dynamics are species wide. The time of individual salvation is over. The time of collective salvation is at our doorstep right now, over and over and over again, it was saying, this is a massive turning point. This is, this is where we had been building to this transition for ions.

Bas de Cock  1:15:23  
It kept showing me

Chris Bache  1:15:25  
a future that was just ecstatic, a future, if you can imagine of our entire species being a species of Buddhas and Christ and prophets totally awakened from the soul of our center. But in all these four years, it never told me how we were going to get there. I had no insight, given how we were going to carry make this transition, travel as far as we had to travel in as little time as all the research was showing, telling us that we had, because really right extinction is pressing down upon us, and it's coming hard and fast. The crisis is moving in on us right now. I share this with you because as I've talked about this, and it's in my book and LSD in the mind of the universe, and as I've talked about this, I've had so many people come up to me and say, I've had the same kind of visions that's been showing me the same thing in my deep meditation practice. We're coming to a turning point. This is a driving force. This is a social, collective force. So there's nothing private, there's nothing personal about this experience. It's not my unique experience. I'm simply witnessing to something which many of us have been experiencing, and I know that you've been experiencing experience that type of material. Dwayne, yeah, yes, indeed, yeah, I'm turning Well,

Duane Elgin  1:16:54  
let me summarize, from from my perspective, what we've been speaking about. And three elements of that come up. Of that summary, we're a world, a species, that's not really recognizing what's going on here. First of all, we're not recognizing the nature of the universe in which we live. The universe is a living system, and current science says, No, it's just dead matter in empty space, and we're ready to work with the material dimensions of it all, and so on and so on. But the deeper aliveness is not recognized. Secondly, we don't recognize who we are. We think, Well, okay, we're biological beings in this Dead universe, and we're making the best of it in a consumer society. And no, we're not recognizing that we are part of that larger aliveness. And thirdly, we're not recognizing the evolutionary journey. And it's dimensions that we've been speaking about we think, well, we die and the lights go out, that must be pretty much it. And no, we're going on and on and on. As Chris, you've been speaking about the reincarnation universe. We just need go on evolving through it all. So really, the transition that I see is, first of all, three fold, a new recognition of where we are. It's a living system. Secondly, a recognition of of who we are as beings we're a part of that larger aliveness. And thirdly, where we're going is way beyond consumerism and such. It's learning to live in that larger aliveness. What an extraordinary journey that we would be blessed with the gift of entering into that kind of journey. And you were bringing up the good the question, Chris, well, how in the world do we make the transition, the three fold transition, and understanding the universe freshly who we are, freshly and where we're going? Well, a lot of attention is being put right now on material systems. Well, it's a climate crisis, so it means too much CO two in the air, which means, well, we got to cut back on on the cars that we drive and so on. It's a material response to a trans material challenge before us. And so again and again people say, Well, what are you going to do about it? And what? One of the key things I've been working on for decades is media, and why media? Media isn't that the problem we've got so much media. It's it's consume is hypnotizing us into a materialistic mindset, and all we have to show for it is more consumerism. No, this goes way beyond that, because the mass media is the access to the mass mind. Here we are on a call with people in different parts of. World right now, and we're beginning to grow the neurological structures of the species as we use the mass media that we have right here to speak with one another and to grow a new understanding, a new consensus, a new consciousness of who we are as a species. So one of the critical elements I feel of a transforming future is to transform our uses of media. And this gathering now is an example, and there are so many more, we're exploding into a new opportunity to use the media to reflect, to use it to reflect on who are we, and then to communicate back. Well, I've seen that mirror, and myself in that mirror, and I see a new possibility out there, and let's begin to evolve into that possibility. So we're on the cusp. We're on the brink. We're on the threshold of using the extraordinary media potentials that are out there right now, two thirds of the people on this planet have one of these things, a cell phone. Two thirds of the people on the planet, all we have to do is pick up that cell phone and we have access to a majority of people on this planet. By the end of this decade, it'll be three quarters of the people on this planet have access to the to the collective mind through one of these so we are over endowed right now with a with the tools, the capacities to communicate with one another and to and to grow into A new collective consciousness of those three dimensions of transformation that we're just right on the threshold of pushing against and the world's pushing back against us. And so it's a learning time for the species. It's an awakening time, a learning time, a growing time, and we're way over endowed with all the tools we need to go through that learning journey.

Chris Bache  1:22:02  
Yeah, this is one area where our work is complementary to the other, because you are deeply committed, lifelong, committed social activist, and you understand in ways that go beyond me, far beyond my understanding of how this how social transformation can take place. What are the roots of that are holding us stuck? Where are the where are the opportunities for facilitating deep social change at a collective level, at a practical, tangible, manifest level, my work has been much more internally focused. So let me speak to the inside of this process. Because while my psychedelic experience has been deeply collective, it takes place in one room, you know, in one house, in on one street. So it's a very different way to access the collective. Let me tell you the next installment, or just point to the next installment in my own journey, personal Death-Rebirth went through that collective Death-Rebirth went through that began to have these visionary experiences of where the human species was being taken of this an extraordinary future, no explanation of how we were going to get there. Carried me then passed that into a series of profound mystical experiences of Non-duality and Shunyata emptiness and, you know, sort of deep, ecstatic joy. Then it took me into the diamond Luminosity work, which occupied the last five years of my work. And in the middle of those of those diamond Luminosity sessions where I was expecting fully to be returned, because I was coming back into the diamond Luminosity about once a year, but every five sessions, purified, purify, purify. Bam. Diamond Luminosity. Purify, purify, purify. Boom, more. But diamond Luminosity and I was about, I was expecting, about time to get back into the diamond Luminosity. But that's not what happened in what was my 55th session in 1995 coming up on what, almost what, 2423 years ago, I went through a process where I dissolved completely into the species I just I became hard to imagine but hard to describe. I became dissolved into the collective unconscious so deeply that my individual consciousness was basically just a slow remnant, and I entered into what I call deep time. I'd gone beyond linear time many times before this dissolved me very, very deeply into deep time. So I was it was a transtemporal experience. So I. Had exploded the boundaries. It was trans spatial experience. It was a transtemporal experience, and it took me into the future, deeper than I had been taken up to that time. And suddenly I began to experience systematically, methodically, clear as a bell. I began to experience the death and rebirth of the human family. It was like being able to experience a thunderstorm where you can see the patterns, you experience the patterns of the storm as a whole, and you experience all of the individual drops in the storm simultaneously. So it's a both an aggregate, but also collective. And I experienced the entire human family moving into a period of crisis. The ordinary structures of our world were being broken down and stripped away. We were losing control. We were being shattered. Civilization was being shattered. Lives were being torn apart. It was just extraordinarily painful. The whole human family was being shoved to the edge of apparent extinction. And is built and built for a long time in the session. And then just when it looked like that was it, this was it. We were coming to the end of it all. It was like a hurricane passing over an island, and the worst of the storm passed, and things began to get lighter. They began to get lighter. People began to pick themselves up. We began to find each other after this. And many, many people had died, but many survived, and as we began to survive, we realized we discovered that we had been changed. This crisis tapped us into something so deep. It drove us so deep into our being that it opened. It unlocked something in us. We shed things we just literally we had stripped from us all sorts of assumptions and accumulations that tapped us into what I came over time to think of as the one heart, that all of our individual hearts are aspects of the one heart, when we began to find each other and meet each Other, there was a there was a creativity that was catalyzing new social forms, new forms of cultural creativity. And this created feedback loops where creativity fed new creativity. And there was an exponential in growth in levels of awareness that were grounded in new values, new perceptions of the good, new understandings of human nature, new understandings of nature itself, new understandings of the Divine. This is what I think of. What I came to see was this was a forecast, not a forecast, because I was in deep time, which means I experienced this transformation from the perspective in which it was already happening, and in the end, I experienced it as something that had already happened and something that was yet to happen. It was this not confusing, but the kind of both and experience that sometimes opens in very deep psychedelic experience. It took me about a year to recover from this one session. What I the way I put in the book, is when I walked around my town in Ohio and I saw all these beautiful beings, all these souls who did not consciously at an individual level, know what they were coming into, but I knew that at a soul level, they knew what they were getting into. At a soul level, they had chosen to incarnate at this time in history, I just felt myself surrounded by courageous souls who were entering consciously into this very, very intense century of transformation. It was like walking around Hiroshima the week before the bomb dropped. Everyone around me I saw was entering into this terrible catalyst of pain, and yet they were deep and profound spiritual warriors. It took me a long time to learn how to live with that, to hold that, but I did, and eventually I brought it into dark night, early dawn, and then I brought it more fully into LSD, in the mind of the universe. And that's a perspective that I know I share with you.

Bas de Cock  1:29:42  
Dwayne, yeah, it's intense. Yeah, yeah.

Duane Elgin  1:29:48  
As as a long time social activist and such, I want to bring a another note into our conversation before we we conclude, and that is, um. Hmm, there are no guarantees here. We've seen the possibilities. We've seen the potential. We've felt it in our souls and our bones and our being. We know that's possible, but there's no guarantee we're going to realize that as a species, as I look at the world, I see three great possibilities for our pathway ahead. One is what we've just been speaking about, extra ordinary invitation into greater aliveness and possibility. But there are two other possibilities that are very, very real. One is the future of collapse and and really the functional extinction, the species, not the complete extinction, but the functional extinction. We're no longer a force and evolution on the earth, nor are we connected well enough with one another to make a difference in our collective lives and build the kind of species body that you're speaking about, Chris, that we could end up just so fragmented and so diminished that we never have the opportunity to pull that species body together in its learning potentials. That's a second possibility, a third possibility, very real we can see now is the authoritarian future. We can see that in in Russia. We can see it in China. We can see it beginning in India and other parts of the world. We can see it in the United States, for heaven sakes, the authoritarian orientation is so strong people are ready to surrender their freedoms. And what you're speaking about, and what I'm speaking about, is claim your freedom. Claim your freedom to be a living participant in a living universe. Grow into that freedom. Don't surrender it to the to the scientists that look at only a material universe, don't surrender it to the media and the politicians that say no, it's just about more and more material well being for all people on the planet. There are three great paths before us, and the one that you've been speaking about, and then that I have, as well, is a narrow pathway I feel, into the future, and we're going to have to do everything we can as a community, not just as individuals, but as you say, Chris, as a community, to elevate ourselves, to awaken ourselves to grow into that future of evolutionary potential, to learn to live in that larger aliveness. So bless you, brother and I. Thank you so much for your life of contribution and service in that and in that future.

Chris Bache  1:32:41  
Yeah, and you too, brother, me before, as we transition soon into questions and answers, which is going to take us into a whole other journey. Right with this? There I have the view, and I think Dewayne shares this view that we have entered this century is a century of labor. We have been gestating the future human for millennia, for 10s of 1000s, hundreds of 1000s of years, we've been gestating it through reincarnation, over and over, deeper and deeper, but now we've come into labor. Gestation is long. Labor is short. Gestation can be gentle and take place while we can keep other things going on. On the surface, labor is not like that. Is it? Labor is intense. It requires complete interruption of life as we have ordinary experienced it and we turn deeply within, and we are in the process of giving birth to collectively what I'm calling the future human. Many people have seen this. They've felt it. They give it different names, Homo spiritualis, Homo noeticus, all sorts of different names. But the fundamental idea is that we are giving birth to a different kind of human being, a different level, a different a more evolved form of humanity.

Chris Bache  1:34:14  
What might this future human look like? What is the what is the substance of the future human? And here I go back to the theme of reincarnation. I go back to some of the experiences that I describe in LSD, in the mind of the universe. And there was, you know, I've done past life therapy before when I wasn't doing the LSD work, and I know about, I've been familiarized with about a dozen of my former lives, nothing special, no one special, just ordinary, run of the mill, peasants, for the most part. But I had a sense of that, you know. But what happened in this particular session is that all my former lives began to come back into me. They all just started coming in very fast and furious. I'd already gone through. A tremendous purification process and a Death-Rebirth process, but then these lives started coming into me. It was like wrapping filaments of light around a kite spool. Each wrap was one life, and at a certain point they hit critical mass. And when they hit critical mass, there was an explosion of energy, and I experienced this explosion of diamond light blow out my chest, catapulting me into a completely new state of consciousness. And all those individual lives fused into one, into a singularity, and then a teaching kept on holding and explaining what was going on, first the experiences, then the illuminating of the experience. But the basic vision that emerges is this. It's a different vision of human of reincarnation than we find in many of the Eastern cultures. The classical view of reincarnation is okay, reincarnate, reincarnate, reincarnate. Get better and better, more compassionate, more intelligent, more this, more that, growing level by level by level. And when you achieve enlightenment, when you achieve a realization that you can understand and let your mind sink into the essence of its source, and you come to that shattering realization that the essence of your life is absolute, is exactly the same as the essence of everybody else's life, and the essence of life itself Atman is Brahman. Yes, our nature is our Buddha nature. When we reach that point, classic thinking is okay now we can leave. You've achieved enlightenment. You have achieved moksha. Escape. You no longer have to be entrapped within ego, but you no longer have to be entrapped within time and space. You have permission to leave. Your work is done. But that's not what came forward in my session. What came forward in my session was the birth of the diamond soul, which meant that, which was the phenomenon that we are reaching a point in human evolution where we have, we have been working in integrating and getting rid of all of our negative karma, purifying ourselves, healing relationships, healing the scars which have been torn into our heart, healing the social scars, healing the civilizational scars we're working and working that material there comes a time when our entire history begins to coalesce, and The early stages of that coalescing often takes this form of healing, purifying, dealing, cleaning out the basement, so on and so forth. But there comes a point when that work is done, and all of those lives congeal, and there is an explosion of consciousness where we no longer experience ourselves as a one generational time space, 100 year old being. We experience ourselves as 100,000 year old being. We experience ourselves as souls, and not a human being with a soul. We experience what a human being actually is. We experience ourselves as souls. And this is what I call the birth of the diamond soul, because we often tend to use the word soul as the spiritual, non embodied, the non physical counterpart to our individual personality. That's not the soul I'm talking about. I'm talking about the consciousness that holds all of our farmer lives, all of them as one. And now what I think is happening is usually we experience that diamond soul only after we die. You know, we go small to big when we die. Ah, yeah, come back to small. We grow some more, then we die. Ah, yes, it feels so good to be big again. But what's happening? I think if we keep that up, just keep it up long enough, sooner or later, the soul wakes up inside physical existence. And when that happens, Heaven manifests on earth when that happens, Nirvana is Samsara. When that happens, we realize we don't have to go anywhere to experience absolute bliss and sheer joy. The goal of evolution, of spiritual evolution, is not to spiritually mature and then leave. I understand where that view came from. I understand its historical context. It makes perfect sense within a context of 5000 years ago, before we understood how old the universe was, how big it was, and how much intelligence had been sunk. Into building this universe. The goal of our spiritual evolution is to

Bas de Cock  1:40:07  
awaken,

Chris Bache  1:40:08  
to truly awaken to our soul consciousness, which opens us into a different relationship with all other beings with whom we share this planet, and opens us into a different relationship to the intelligence that is manifesting time and space continuously regenerating it. The goal is to awaken to that, to embody that in our physical being, not a disembodied, transcendental awakening, but an embodied awakening, and then to bring that consciousness into the making of history, into the making of the planet, into the making of a civilization, a world which truly does work for all. How far can we take this? What will it look like? It's not going to look like, just what it looks like in the very beginning stages. What our spiritual traditions have told us over and over again is that mind creates our destiny as the mind leads, Destiny follows. We are creating our reality with our mind. When our mind is fragmented and conflicted, we live in a fragmented and conflicted reality. Now this is we have to be careful, this is not simply an individual story. It's a collective story. There's a dynamic feedback between our individual manifestation, our collective manifestation. But basically, we are learning, I think, how to control the nuclear energy, which is the soul, the fiery energy, light energy, which is our essential divine energy, cosmic energy. We are learning how to be gods. And I don't mean that in any superficial sense. We are evolving into a being which truly not only will be at peace with ourselves and at harmony with each other, but a being which has capacity to manifest creativity inside time and space, the likes of which maybe today we only know in the mystical literature, in the spiritual literature, what the Tibetans call The mahasiddhas, The Great Beings, the great beings around who have the capacity to work miracles. They have the capacity to manifest consciousness in ways that absolutely dazzle our mind and don't make any sense within a materialist scientific perspective, because they have gathered so much conscious power that they can manifest this in a way that bends the laws of physics, so to speak. I suspect what they're doing is manifesting a deeper set of laws of physics than are manifest at a lower energy level. This is high energy physics, yeah. So I think we're coming. We're giving birth to the future human. We're giving we're maturing. We're growing into a mature adult. And if we ask, well, what does a mature adult look like? It's not simply a human being the way we are now, with higher values and better values. It's truly an awakened human being, a soul centered human being that lives at peace with themselves and at peace with each other, and now we pivot. And of course, this isn't, this isn't the end of the story, right? Let's assume for the minute we make this transition. One century, two centuries, three centuries, we make this transition. Universe isn't stopping, right? We're going to be here for millions, billions of years, right? We have at least 4 billion years before the sun goes supernova. We got to be off the planet in about 2 billion years. That's a lot of time you're going this is just the beginning of a transition. We're just waking up. We're like children in the crib created by the universe, waking up into this beautiful room. We're just waking up to what we are, who we are, activating our potential and moving on, moving forward that now I believe, with Dwayne, that he's right. The note, there's no guarantees here.

Bas de Cock  1:44:17  
This is

Chris Bache  1:44:20  
we have to put we have to everybody show up. Everybody has to maximize everything they can do to possibly to make this, to get us through this, to bring us through this whole transition. I understand that, and I accept that, and I think that's true, but I also would like to offer you a slightly different perspective from within my psychedelic experience, and I don't know how to reconcile these two, but from within my psychedelic experience, I've been taken so deep into the future so many times, and in my last deep vision, the 70th session was my last, what I call the great visions, deep. Deep into the future, and from that deep future, I experienced this transformation as a given, as something that we had accomplished, not something that was an open ended possibility, but something which we had truly accomplished. So from my own personal heart. I cannot doubt that we will make this transition. I worry deeply about what it's going to cost us. How many of our children will die, how many of our world's children will die of starvation? And you, we know it's coming in that way. That's what I'm worried about, and it's going to take every one of us at maximum exertion to really pull this off. And yet we're not driving this, right? Human beings are not driving this. Nature is driving this. The creative intelligence of nature is driving this. We didn't give ourselves the big brain 100,000 years ago, we didn't give ourselves the evolutionary qualities that are embodied in ourselves, in our mind and in our physical body. Some larger process is driving this process. The most we can do is cooperate with it, to recognize, to wake up, to see what's happening, cooperate with it and to become a collaborator, a co creator of this future human, which we will then in our future incarnations, incarnate into. But I think the shift that we're seeing taking place, it's grinding its way forward, is a shift in the plate tectonics of the collective psyche. It's a shift at the very, very deep structure that after we make this shift, every human being born will be operating out of a different collective psyche, out of a different level of soul awareness. And that's the work of the hour. That's what we and we all knew we were getting getting into this. When we were born, we chose to be part of this process. And with that knowledge, we can relax even while we go to work, we can relax in that deeper way of taking spiritual nurturance from the universe even as we go to work and do our best.

Speaker 5  1:47:24  
So brother,

Chris Bache  1:47:26  
let's open it up and see what these good people where they want to go.

Duane Elgin  1:47:30  
Yeah, thank you, brother, this has been a delight to share this this hour with you, and I'm so deeply grateful, I just want to say for our friendship over these deck towns. Bless you.

Speaker 6  1:47:42  
Yeah, likewise, brother.

Bas de Cock  1:47:46  
As as said from this place, what an amazing, deep words. It's not about the words about the energy felt during your dance. It's transformative by itself. So I'm really, I'm really honored, honored by these words. And I have 1000 questions that I said off your course, Chris, I gained 1000 questions more, and now I've got 2000 questions. But concerning the time, I want to open up the or the microphone for the fellow, the fellow wisdom keepers, people have questions, sharings, whatever comes up wants to be shared now is the time and the place, and our questions as hosts will come, maybe at The end. So if you have a question, if you have one symptom to share, just open up your microphone and feel comfortable to to to go.

Chris Bache  1:48:51  
I see Todd has got his hand raised.

Speaker 5  1:48:55  
Well, it is lovely to see you both, and I would offer that your conjoined synergy is part of that love that gives us great optimism for future. I'm a painfully optimistic sort because of having taste of that unconditional love and that complexity that's about and so I my optimism. We unchanged, though we do know there's a collective great n de coming for the species, but the transformative power is wonderful. Just to offer some of the small kernels that I see changing is just the fact that we're talking about psychedelics are not a panacea for every individual, but they are so quickly entering a wider conversation, and to me, that's going to be one of the essential tools to help change the consciousness individually and then, of course, collectively, just as one tiny little nugget, I received email yesterday of a group and some of the folks I know that are deeply thoughtful and deeply committed toward a holistic understanding of existence, and they're putting together leadership schools, which. With a psychedelic component, to those with a cohort goes through, thinks deeply about all the things that you know, a planetary, holistic, universal idea, but with the aid of having that transformative discovery within and then going forth all together to a with a greater understanding. And to me, that's was unheard of just a few few years ago, let alone a decade or two. And so for those to me, are those moments of showing that there are so many folks working toward a greater understanding that that will get here, even though there's gonna be great pain before that's manifested on a wider scale. So anyway, thank you for your work, and I share your optimism, and it's unshakable, dammit.

Chris Bache  1:50:42  
And how could we not mention this great book by Dwayne choosing Earth. And there's a film that he and Colleen have created, there's a course which they have created, there are a number of initiatives and Dwayne, I'll let you talk about this. But this is an extraordinarily powerful book. And one of the things I love about it, he's given it away. It's like too important to try to make any money off it. He's been giving it away. And if you get it in the PDF form, all the references are hot linked. So you can pop right, right, right into one article after another, one Research Institute after another. It's all hot linked, and you can move right into it and go very deeply.

Speaker 6  1:51:23  
Dwayne

Duane Elgin  1:51:26  
The one thing I would say, moderating my optimism, this book looks, oh, 6070, years into the future, and I've been doing futures research for a half century, truly. And this book is the accumulation of that half century of work. And I want to be optimistic, but boy, I tell you, It's fierce. The world is coming down on us now, not 10 years from now, but no and we could run through the elements once again. But the reality is, we're up against it now, and it requires our courage now. It requires our collective consciousness. Now it requires a new media to reflect back to us, new possibilities, new priorities, new perspectives on on where we are, who we are, where we're going now. So to the extent that there are people watching and this program now, get on with your work. Get on with your life. Choose the freedom that you have off your creativity to our wounded world to move into this more transforming future.

Bas de Cock  1:52:44  
So thank you. You bet, yeah, I see a hand of Henrik. You can open up your mic.

Speaker 7  1:52:55  
Hey, thank you. So I came here as someone who's curious, and so I am going to ask a question at the risk of sounding flippant, because I obviously don't have the experience that the three of you have, but I'm just going to ask this question from a position of curiosity and trying to get some clarity. So I've heard a lot of things, reincarnation, karma. You know, the path of the soul is taking the path of humanity going forward. We come from a source and intelligence, and it sounds like it's a very profound worldview, right? And I, I came from a Christian worldview. I'm no longer in that world for you. And my question is, what makes you guys so convinced this is actually reality, or this is actually true? And it's not just the LSD messing with your hats. To be I told you it was gonna be flip, but you guys

Chris Bache  1:54:06  
absolutely, good question. Absolutely. Thank you. I'll take a shot, Dwayne, then you take a shot. Yeah. Okay. Ken ring, founder of near death episode studies, founder of the Journal of near death studies, good friend, long friend. He and I. He asked the same question at me and asked it hard and pushed it hard, and we had a back and forth dialog, and it was so rich that we decided we'd publish it. So if you were to go to medium.com There's an article that you can track down by that it's an it's a dialog between Ken and I, and the title is our deep psychedelic experiences, trustable. How do we know that I'm just not picking up on the echoes of my personal mind, or I'm picking echoes of the collective psyche? What are their crap? Criteria that we can use to evaluate these experiences, and I just lay it out as clearly as I can. Ken punches at me. I respond. It's a good dialog. It's a really important question, are they trustable? Right? There's not a simple answer to that question. You really have to kind of take it and look at it deeply as you go through it, because it's not enough to say experientially, they're trustable. There has to be more meat on those bones. It has to be more substances. And I think there is. I think we do have some empirical evidence that these experiences are verifiable and are trustworthy, some of them, not all of them, but then there are other ones which begin to look at cross disciplinary coherence that adds another layer of trustability. Yeah, it's an important question, but what I would emphasize is that I would never say the things that I said today if I were speaking 30 years ago now, because if you take a look at my scholarship, and I know Dewayne scholarship, it's not just that We're sharing visionary experiences. We've done our homework. I don't offer reincarnation as a philosophical or theoretical perspective or based on an experiential perspective. I did my homework. I looked at all the available evidence for reincarnation. I looked deeply at Stan grofwork and the available evidence and support of the hypotheses and the cosmology that he's presented in many of his books. So it's a combination of rigorous Scholarship, which has lots of different aspects to it, and then carefully recorded offered psychedelic experiences. And what we find, of course, is there's a the cosmology that emerges in psychedelic work is essentially the same as the cosmology that emerges in other deep, contemplative mystical traditions. It's not a new cosmology, it's simply a new way of accessing that same fundamental core worldview.

Duane Elgin  1:57:22  
Dwayne Yep. Let's see. That's a really important question, really important. And I raised, you know, the book The Living Universe. I spent 30 years looking across cultures, through different dimensions of science and so on to ask that question, is there any agreement, as we look around the world through different wisdom traditions, that this is the nature of reality, or am I just fantasizing that we're living in this living entity? Well, indeed, there's a very strong consensus, and a surprisingly strong consensus. And if we had more time, I would love to get into that. So first of all, if we look at the world's wisdom traditions, there is a growing consensus about the nature of reality, human identity and the evolutionary journey. Secondly, if you want other evidence, as I said, I spent three years in a laboratory setting with experiment after experiment exploring the intuitive potentials of the human being. And that's those are the potentials that are required for us to reach into the larger universe and draw into ourselves, the insights that Kristen is so beautifully spoken of, and I assure you that the CIA would not continue. The intelligence agency would not continue this work for 20 years. After they declared it secret, they went for another 20 years, unless they were getting meaningful, validated scientific information about our expanded capacities as human beings. So we can go to different sources of validation and verification, but it's there, but we're just beginning to accumulate that evidence now, and that is now being presented to us, and whether through the psychedelic vehicle or through the meditation experiences and so on, but the evidence is there, and beautiful question, though. Thank you.

Chris Bache  1:59:39  
And in addition to that article by Ken and I that dialog. You'll see a reference there, and you can find it at my website, Chris bache.com, and you can also see it in academia.edu, where I've put a lot of my major articles posted. You just look up Chris Bache there, and there is a section from the. First chapter of dark night, early dawn, which really drills down on this question. And the section is called the epistemic value of psychedelic experience, right? The epistemological value, and I really lean on that and hard. So, yeah, important question.

Speaker 7  2:00:15  
Yeah. I appreciate your answers. Thank you very much.

Bas de Cock  2:00:21  
I see a hand for Sue, please open up your microphone.

Speaker 8  2:00:26  
Okay, I just want to say a huge thank you to both Chris and Dwayne, because I think they have the most enormous courage, and I feel encouraged to face whatever it is that may be coming away, because they have the courage to go there in detail, both Chris through I've read your book, so I know the detail of how much pain you know, collective human or other human pain that you went through. And I just think, yeah, to have kept going with that kept going is absolutely amazing. So thank you. And for Dewayne to look into the future, to see really the terrifying prospects there, and still to you know, be encouraging us and going forward. So I just wanted to say, I wonder whether our collective consciousness has gone down rather than up, which with reincarnation, the idea is that you learn something and come back. But I personally, I feel that the goddess culture is going back to pre history had a lot of very high consciousness going on, you know, the Minoan civilizations, etc. And I kind of feel that through our materialism, our consciousness has has kind of gone down, become more limited. So I suppose I wonder whether the idea of reincarnation, taking us forward, how that could fit to a kind of decline in consciousness and awareness of who we are in a living universe. Because I think there were cultures in previous times that had that. Sorry, I'm going a bit crazy on this thing on my screen. Stop. But so just, I'd be interested what you thought about that,

Chris Bache  2:02:20  
Dean. You want to start in this one, and

Duane Elgin  2:02:22  
I have a very simple response to that. We have just become a collective species, civilization, only in the last few decades, with with the growth of the mass media in the post, post World War Two era, we are becoming a collective entity, a collective being, if you will. That's not to diminish the wakefulness of earlier people and civilizations, but it's rather to recognize this is a new epoch, a new era, a new condition of the whole human family being pushed together by multiple crises that, you know, we went down the list, the climate crisis, the species extinction, all the rest, we are being compressed and squeezed as a species to awaken in a new way that and we did not have those pressures in earlier times at a planetary scale, and That's where we are now. So this is a very unique situation. It's not to diminish the past, but it's rather to awaken to the challenges of the future.

Speaker 6  2:03:29  
Okay,

Chris Bache  2:03:32  
I'd suggest a very simple analogy. You can look at it in the context of meditation, but also in the concept of physiology. If you fast for health, if you go through an extended fast, a safe fast, and you're doing so for health, what we find is that after a day or two, you begin to have all sorts of flu, like symptoms, you know, you just feel miserable, you feel terrible, your nose is running, and all this stuff. And then, after several days, you move through that, and then you enter a period where you begin to feel better than you had when you started. Same thing happens in meditation. You meditate in order to feel better. So you quiet your mind. You get very still, you fast your mind. What happens? Your unconscious begins to throw up all its garbage. I mean, it's just all the pain start coming up and all the emotions start coming up. And you think, what the hell? Why this is getting worse, not better. But if you hold it, it eventually works its way through, and you begin to move into a deeper state, a sense of well being, understanding that reincarnation is happening not just individually, but it's happening collectively. One of the ways of understanding some of the rhythm of the epics that we've moving into, or have been moving into, is that humanity has begun to detoxify itself. Literally, I think souls are. Taking into their incarnations, into their current incarnation, and it has been for some time more karma than they might have in earlier generations and earlier centuries. They are literally stacking up more collective and individual karma to work on in their lifetime. And if you looked at this only from the outside, you would think that these we are kind of devolving because we're dealing with more and more basic problems and more elemental problems. But again, from an evolutionary perspective, if we hold this, if we hold a perspective like on meditation, like on fasting, we are clearing this past. Humanity is clearing its path. And it looks maybe like things are getting worse, but I think what it is is we're getting down to business. We're getting down to some serious business, and we are healing that past. But the only way to heal that past is to confront it. Is to let it into your awareness. We heal the past by expanding our consciousness and embracing the consciousness of it, and likewise socially manifesting states of states of awareness in our culture, where we heal the racism, we heal the gender is and we heal the speciesism by holding that in our awareness and saying, No, we're not going to do that anymore. We're not going to rape our daughters anymore. We're not going to behave towards people of other cultures and other colors the way we've done in the past. We're going to move into this into a better world. So it is a complex picture, but I think from a deep enough perspective, it can begin to make

Bas de Cock  2:06:37  
more sense. I i would like to add something as a holistic doctor as well, because from a biological perspective, as you see, our brain developments during evolution, I think trauma has a major effect, especially the collective trauma, which made us, during evolution, less receptive for the collective view, instead of, yeah, seeing life as separate, and we're now waking up of these collective trauma and the healing, as you said. So I think there are several aspects which are very coming together on a biological but also on the social, but on the spiritual level, which comes together which give us deeper insights of these evolutionary swings during our last decades. Thank you. David, saw a hand of you,

Bas de Cock  2:07:46  
please open up your microphone. David, you're not audible.

Speaker 1  2:07:51  
You're Yeah, okay now, yeah, I want to thank you both so so much. That was so moving, and I want us to be moved tonight. I mean, out of this, I want us to be taking some action. I'm 80 now. I know I'm in the final phase of my life. It might go on 20 years, or whatever, whichever way you look at the mathematics, I'm in the final phase of my life. I don't have children, so I haven't passed on genes. But I've been thinking recently, it isn't only genes. At this moment, the important thing is passing on memes. I'm going back to Richard Dawkins original formulation of that he was looking for a sociological a social thing that was transferred. And it's the means that we now pass on to future generations that are important. And one of those memes for me is unconditional love. I can't go through the story of how that's come up in my my life. I did my as a very mature student. I did my masters in consciousness and Transpersonal psychology on the title of from fear of the other to unconditional love. I really looked into the nature of it. But how do we move? How do we move from here we've got a prevailing ecosystem of memes, which are separation, which, and with separation comes you have to make up for this emptiness somehow, as you say, we are, we are the one at our deepest level. So separation leads us to greed and all all the things that are happening. And so that's a prevailing ecosystem. How do we change it? And sometimes, if you have a prevailing ecosystem which dominates, there can be niches in that eco system where new cells can form. And I see as a and like this is a cell here tonight, and I'm a consciousness only person. I think the nature of. Reality is consciousness, and I think we underplay the value of this Zoom meeting, for example, we think we're all in separate places. We are, but consciousness itself is non local. There's no separation between our minds at this moment, if we were in the same room, your words, Chris and do it? Do I they would be sounding the same in our heads, whatever the medium of transmission. So right now, we're not separate here. We're not separate now we can communicate mind to mind, and sometimes species have different phases of their, their E, of their individual evolution. Like a fungus can have a phase as a spore, and then it can come to earth and then form, and I think there's a great possibility in doing you were talking about this, the of the medium, right, like this, that we can form these cells of spores at the moment, so we're ready to come to earth, and we can begin to come to earth now. And I hope out of this meeting tonight, there'll be a few people I want to be part of cells now, looking at how we can transform. I I haven't had a psychedelic path I took. I took acid once, 50 years ago, a new girlfriend introduced me to it, and it blew my it blew my mind. If I could have continued, if I could have got standardized doses and proper supervision, I definitely would have continued, but I probably wasn't ready for it at that time. But I know that the power come from one that one experience it, you know, it changed a lot of things for me. So what I would like to do is maybe the conveners of this meeting could do it. I'll put my email address. And if anybody wants to form a cell tonight to take up some of the themes we've been talking about, I would love to be part of that cell, and I want it. I want us to move from tonight. So thank you both very much for such a stimulating and motivating tool.

Chris Bache  2:12:18  
Thank you, David. And how do we change. How do we move forward? And when that, when I'm asked that question in public lectures, I say, Read Dwayne Elgin's book. Talk to Dwayne Elgin. So Dwayne, this one's yours.

Duane Elgin  2:12:35  
Thank you both, David. First thing I would say is that separation is, is, is now breaking down, and like it or not, we're being pushed into a sense of unity as a species organism, and we need to step up to take care of the emergencies that surround us now. So first of all, the separation is true, and it has been really amplified by a consumerist, materialist mindset. But that mindset is breaking down. It that is the mindset that's creating the the crises that we're facing right now. So the first thing that needs to happen is we withdraw legitimacy from that mindset, that worldview, that paradigm, and and we are, we are withdrawing legitimacy from that paradigm. If you look at the young people on the planet, surveys show, a recent global survey showed that 57% of young people feel we are doomed. Quote, quote, we're doomed. That's what they were saying. 57% now the politicians are certainly not saying that, the the corporate people are not saying that. Typical academics are not saying that, religious leaders, traditionally are not saying that. But it is surfacing in the world, nonetheless, because that is the reality. It's breaking you know, separation is breaking down, the legitimacy of the old institutions is is declining. And so we have an opportunity to choose new pathways ahead, personally, institutionally, collectively. And so this is a an extraordinary time in human history, when, when we do have a we have freedom. There's this interval of freedom that we have to make choices anew. And we didn't have that like when I'm 80 as well, David. And so when I was young boy, there were not there wasn't the freedom to make those kind of choices. But there is now, and so this is an awakening, time for the human family, instead of time to use the media and the computer systems and all the rest create new memes. Create new memes for possibility. That's what Chris is doing. That's what I'm doing. And it's clearly, it seems, what you're doing as well. Keep going. We're just getting started here. Keep going.

Chris Bache  2:15:11  
Let me add a footnote to that. When I was doing my psychedelic work, I never let my students know about it, never talked about it. I mean, I taught psychedelic research, I taught Stan Grof work, but I never let them know that I was doing this work. Personally, I only a few people and a few friends in my department knew what I was doing. So I had these two separate sides of my life. I had a silo where I did my psychedelic work, and then I'd come to campus and I would be doing my ordinary teaching work. But what I found was that the deeper I went in my psychedelic work, the more the effects of that work began to spill over and show up in my classroom that my students were being impacted by my psychedelic journey. Even though they weren't being impacted, they weren't knowing about it. They were I wasn't talking about it. It wasn't a physical impact. There was a sort of a psychic impact. I began to find that there was a porosity, where I was beginning to have access to aspects of their life, where in my personal experience, I was just answering a question. I was reaching into the fertile void of my imagination to answer a question that a student was being asked. But then I they would come up and tell me that the answer that I had given was an actual reflecting, actually what was happening in their life that week, this time, and this was, this was rattled me so badly that I began to have to study what the hell is going on here. How can my personal work be had, producing these collective manifestations. And I worked on this for a long time, and eventually I wrote to the book The living classroom, which is really not so much about teaching, it's about the dynamics of the collective psyche in groups. States of consciousness. There is no such thing as private realization. States of consciousness are inherently collective, an awakened state of consciousness naturally distributes out around us. It's like throwing a rock in a lake. The ripples just spread out when a person begins to throw off the layers of distortion and pain and begins to enter into deeper and deeper states of clarity, the people around us are naturally, spontaneously and inevitably, are affected. Now, there are things that we can do to accelerate and intensify this contagion. We can meet online. We can we can dissolve distances of 1000s of miles by bringing our minds together in this one space. And I believe psychically, we energize the field of this mind of this collective space. If we did this once a week, every week, for several years, we would begin to experience an even stronger field, because it would be influenced by Rupert Sheldrake work and Morphic genetic field theory, not just by the energy of this particular group of people, but by all the people who had ever come together to study or to discuss this particular issue. And that's what I found in my classes too, that it wasn't just a matter of my mind, kind of having a derivative or an impact on the present students, but the students, in coming together to study these things and to learn these things, were generating a field, and the field persisted after the students left, and it was reinforced and deepened by the field by the students who came next semester, so that there was A learning that was taking place within the semester, and there was a learning that was taking place across semesters over years and years. So we have the psychic reality that where one of us goes, all of us go, to a degree, but then we can reinforce that by using the technology that reinforces this collective sharing, right? And it doesn't have to be simply a psychic distribution. It can be a physical distribution and a physical creativity, yeah, yeah. Great question.

Bas de Cock  2:19:32  
David, yeah. Thank you. Thank you. I see through three questions, also question the chat box will will serve for the end. And I want to say this because David, I want to reassure you, this movement will continue. And we, as wisdom keepers, we already started this trajectory of this movement. So everyone has subscribed for this wisdom keepers or the. Formal wisdom keepers will be invited for our next wisdom keeper circle to keep this alive, and doesn't matter where you want to share your Yeah, your your future perspectives, or your ideas or etc, you were more than invited in our next gathering. Our circle will be on the 18th of February, that's on a Saturday, to have space for everyone to want to be involved, to continue with the journey and to learn to grow into maturity. So great question. David, thank you.

Speaker 1  2:20:37  
Are they regular meetings? How far apart are they?

Bas de Cock  2:20:42  
So we want monthly because as youngsters, we and as youngsters, I feel I'm almost 50, a male, little bit younger, but you are youngsters. I do my psychedelic training. I do my psychedelic work. I'm a doctor. I have a retreat center and etc, so monthly basis. But there are a lot of groups where you can share in, but you're more than invited to to join and to to join together.

Speaker 1  2:21:11  
Yeah, I'll come. I'll also put my email address in the in the chat box. Okay. Thank you very much. I'll let the questions move on. Perfect.

Bas de Cock  2:21:21  
And I think it's, and that's, that's an indirect question. Council of Elders, as we already discussed Chris during the LSD in the mind of the universe. Course, I think it's wise to invite them as well, just to open a space for wisdom keepers to to add their wisdoms during the meeting so we can learn and thrive together. So thank you for that. A question by Todd, please feel open.

Speaker 5  2:21:51  
Okay, I'll be brief, and already had my turn, but one to mention to Dwayne. First of all, thank you both again, for everybody that shows up here for being part of this living classroom. But Dwayne, I had captive here, and I might have shared with you previously, my son is a college student and several of his friends for a recent upper spring break, and we used your book choosing Earth, and we had little assignments and play and deep conversation. But I would offer is that, if we're not amongst those of that age group, we're not realizing To what degree the consciousness is already changing amongst those great those folks. I mean, it's, it's palpably different, and the questions that they're asking are starting from a higher or deeper level of consciousness. You know, I'm not to in any way malign you two lovely 80 year olds, but I'm a great fan of the actuarial tables. I mean, I think that's our our continuing reincarnation blender. And so when you see these ones coming up that are having the questions that they're grappling with have already been answered in their line that previous generations thought were not even questions were valid. So anyway, appreciate CH, choosing Earth, and there are a lot of good youth out there that are populating further and farther and forward. So thank you and good night.

Bas de Cock  2:23:09  
Thank you. Thank you. Tom,

Chris Bache  2:23:12  
aren't they just amazing? They are so much farther along the young people are than we were when we were their age. I mean, it's just, it's like when, when the going gets tough, God sends in the A team. You know, they are just extraordinary in their capacities and their drive. Terry, you've got your hand up,

Speaker 3  2:23:33  
yeah, I do. And no one's thanked the wisdom keepers yet. So thank you for putting this on and thank you, Chris, I've been following you a bit over the years. And Dwayne, I had never heard of you until I read choosing Earth. So huge gratitude for giving that to us for free. Really, really appreciate that. And my question has to do with the labor pains and the creative intelligence. Is it is it in the realm of possibility that things like like covid, like the climate, climate crisis, that they're part of the labor pains to bring us into an awakening, an awareness, a connection, a worldwide union of spiritual souls, to know that, to know the truth and to move us forward into a miraculous future.

Bas de Cock  2:24:35  
Yes,

Duane Elgin  2:24:37  
absolutely, yes, indeed the trauma of the traumas of our time are catalysts for awakening. And so a trauma is not something to avoid, but rather to embrace, to learn from and to rise above. And so we're being pushed by the traumas of our own creation. The this. Region, extinction, resource depletion, climate crisis and so on. These are these are things we're creating. But now we're the our creations are coming back to impact us and and to push us into a larger sense of who we are as a species, a deeper sense of of what is going on here and where we're going. So absolutely, this is a part of the labor pains of the birth of a species, civilization and soul.

Speaker 3  2:25:28  
Yes, thank you.

Chris Bache  2:25:31  
Yep, I really do. Yeah. You don't need he got it. Yeah, you know what we're seeing going into this century, where we are now, decade by decade, things are going to be getting worse. It's going to be a deeper unraveling, a deeper falling apart. We can see some of the ways in which this is likely to manifest. It's going to manifest in ways that we can't anticipate quite yet, and it's going to hurt like hell. But as Dwayne said, these are all. These are problems of our own making. These are problems of our own making. So we're going to have to confront that in us which has made these problems. And I, again, I want to remind you who is confronting this crisis, who's going to be going into this global systems crisis, not human beings, the way we ordinarily think of human beings. Souls will be going into this crisis. Each human being carries multiple, multiple, multiple incarnations woven into the fabric of their psyche and into their body. That means that each human being is carrying potentially 1000s of years of experience going into this crisis. Some of those experiences are really negative and kind of, you know, destructive, but many of those experiences are are mature, wiser, and we, if we, if the world is at odds with itself, our soul is also at odds with itself. We're having to come to terms with our own limitations. And the important point here is that what's happening on the world at large mirrors what's happening in the world in intra psychically, the world is trying to become one, is trying to confront the limitations of its past behaviors. But we carry those, those behaviors. We carry those tendencies inside our psyches, so that as the world is struggling to become one, we are struggling to become coherent within ourselves, to become one soul. And I think there is a synergy there, so that the the the drivers of global systems crisis and global climate change and and the various uh diseases that will be hitting us and so on and so forth, those are driving a global Awakening, and simultaneously, they're driving an inner, internal awakening. So it's a both hands situation.

Speaker 3  2:28:05  
Thank you. Thank you both. Thank you, Terry.

Bas de Cock  2:28:11  
It's amazing how two and a half hours already passed, and it feels like we're just beginning. And that's it's a beautiful thing. And I want to create 10 more minutes for a rounding part. As we say, psychedelics needs to be beautifully round before we go. I want to invite someone didn't ask a question, but feel somewhere deep inside itself. Want to ask a question, to think about it, to have this opportunity to ask or to share somewhat something. I want also to give the opportunity to Mayo, to ask a question from whatever sort it is. I go to the chat box now, because I saw there was a question Kim coming in, and I have to see where it is. Sorry,

Bas de Cock  2:29:13  
so I can't find a question now, okay, so please, so I can't find a question in the in the in the chat box. Now if you have put the question in the chat box, please feel open to to raise your hand and ask us the question. Lively mayo, please go ahead and then Michelle, I saw your

Speaker 4  2:29:32  
me. Okay, doing Chris, I love you guys. There's nothing more to say. But I love you guys as much as I love everyone else. As David said, we are consciousness. And even even though we are utilizing some of the systems, some of the actual technologies that perhaps might have brought us here, in this time, in our world, faster than in the evolutionary history, we are connected. And this is what matters the most, for me and hopefully for everyone else. My question for both Chris and Dewayne, Chris, you mentioned compassion, as well as Wayne, you mentioned suffering, and in the other face of suffering, there's compassion, and with that, there is beyond personal compassion and beyond collective compassion. But what are the three practical steps that we can take today to gain this sense of compassion for Chris and Dewayne. What are three practical or at least give us one practical application in a sense, I'm looking forward to what does communication? How does that play a role in this sharing, in this understanding of compassion from our humanness, not from the individuality, but from the humanness that ties us all into this soul,

Bas de Cock  2:30:49  
enriched life. Yeah,

Chris Bache  2:30:52  
good question. Huh? Dwayne asking us to put it on the line here, yeah, give us three specific things you want to take. The first one, golly,

Duane Elgin  2:31:05  
I'm going to give one that I think he would be surprised with. So what Heck, I was going to be a doctor early on in life, as I mentioned at the outset, and I was thinking about being a vet or a doctor. And so one thing that I do when I look at the world and how we humans are creating it, I look at animal rescue videos. And I tell you, if you look at at the creatures of the earth and different parts of the earth, and you go online and say, well, dog rescues or animal rescue. And the videos start coming up, and it just breaks the heart open and and the the love for the well being of all life, not just human life, all life is just floods into your heart, your soul, your mind, your consciousness. If you look at the suffering of animals and and say, well, it could be better. It doesn't have to be like that. Why do they have to suffer so much? Well, it it pushes back against us. So number one, I would say, go online and just look at videos of animals and dogs and cats and so on and and how they're suffering. And this is goes beyond whether we eat meat or not. This has to do with life and how it's being lived by the rest of the creature on this earth that we share it with. So that would be one. It's really, really powerful.

Chris Bache  2:32:44  
I agree. Dwayne, the thing that came into my mind first was take some suffering out of the world. Look at our lives. Take some suffering out of the world, not only just between human beings, leading towards a gentler life and a clearer life, but towards other species. Look at how our life is impacting and causing suffering in the world, and take it out in spiritual practice and in Buddhist practice, for example, the first thing you do when you begin any meditation, any practice is you cultivate bodhicitta, which is the cultivating the desire to save all sentient beings, which is you're doing this practice, not for yourself. The last thing you do at the end of the practice is you do what's called the distribution of merit. You take all the merit that you've generated with the practice and you give it away. You give it away to all levels of the being, because this is an attempt to shatter the illusion of individual enlightenment. We do not do these practices for ourselves. It's not about personal transformation. It's about collective transformation, and in terms of taking suffering out of the world. Dwayne, how could you not mention your work, voluntary simplicity, the first book you wrote, right? Yeah, this is, this is common sense for world that's living over its means. Voluntary simplicity. Simpler, simple, not in order to starve yourself or deny yourself, but simpler in order to liberate yourself, in order to integrate yourself, to give yourself options that you don't have if you're committed to complexity, affluence and so on and so forth. So gentler, shared and simpler.

Speaker 4  2:34:37  
Yeah, yeah. Great. Thanks so much. And with with that, something that both of you created a an important note on is using media as tool. Yes, how can we utilize the media? And David also spoke about circles, besides watching video. Of animals, and also the suffering that we have as as a world. What are some ways that media can impact what? What can we build? How can we build these, these, these real connections with other human beings through these videos? Are there any projects that both of you are involved that maybe we can jump on or or expand on that Wayne,

Duane Elgin  2:35:24  
well, great question. The choosing Earth project, choosing earth.org really is attempting to do this build networks of care and compassion for the well being of all life that's explicit in the work that we're doing. It's not just for we humans, it's for all life. We all rise or fall together. And so let's build the relationships of awareness, of compassion, of love, on behalf of the well being of all life. And it's just exploding onto the earth right now, and they're just countless avenues for tapping into the creativity, the consciousness and the care, the compassion, it's there and and we need to meet what the opportunity that's now available, and I'm thinking of young people as well At the same time and how far along this path they are relative to we adults, we olders. And by the way, I don't think Chris is nowhere near 80. He's a kid on the

Speaker 4  2:36:32  
block. Oh, I'm only 7373

Duane Elgin  2:36:36  
he's got a long ways to go, so

Chris Bache  2:36:41  
in the broader to sort of push beyond the sort of specific media question. I don't think, to bring this revolution about, to bring this transformation about, it's going to take just all of the skills that we have all the capacities had. It's going to take doctors. Can take social activists. Going to take educators. It's going to take politicians. It's going to take artists. It's going to take musicians. It's if we start making an itemized list of what we need to do, then we inevitably shrink to some kind something that reflects our own personal strengths are on our personal agenda. I think the the issue is not figuring out what we can do. I don't think that's the hard part. The hard part is finding the courage within ourselves to do with what we know we can do. Right here, right now, we are already standing on the spot where we have chosen to stand as our awareness. As we come into awareness, do we have the courage to do what we know we can do without delay, right now or not? And everyone of us who asks, Who is willing to do that, we're going to do different things because we have different aptitudes, different agendas, different karmic trajectories. We don't need to do what somebody else is doing. We just need to do what we have the capacity to do, right here, right now, as deeply as we can. And in that lies, I think, a deep existential satisfaction in that we can come to the end of our life and know we did our part, and that's what we want, isn't it? We want to know that we did our part as deeply as we could Yeah, right. Great question.

Speaker 4  2:38:33  
Thank you so much, both of you for existing and for showering us with Your wisdom and all of your energy. We really appreciate who you are and what you are for all of us. Thank you. You're very welcome. Thank you,

Bas de Cock  2:38:48  
Michelle. Michelle adeby, you had a question.

Speaker 9  2:38:54  
Thank you, bass. Just listening to the last two answers has just brought up more questions, so I'll hold those my original question really projects far, far into the future and arises from some of my own visions that I've had through meditation and at this point in our this historical point as we are at the ends of our experiment of separation and materialism, within that context, we're held within this very dense physical body.

Speaker 6  2:39:34  
So

Speaker 9  2:39:36  
Chris, in your journeys, have you journeyed to the point or seen that place where there's no longer a need for this physical, dense form, where we actually are consciousness in our etheric, emotional, causal bodies. We don't need a physical body anymore, but we are living this experience.

Bas de Cock  2:40:00  
In this

Speaker 9  2:40:03  
altered reality, I suppose it wouldn't be this dense physical reality.

Chris Bache  2:40:07  
Yeah, you know, I don't question, but that that is a potential that can be actualized, and may be actualized over the long course of our evolutionary trajectory. But my focus has been different. And I think that, I think that we have, we're coming out of a period of history about 5000 years old, where we have had a kind of a transcendent orientation all the religions of the Axial Age of about the last three to 5000 years. I think what happened was we began to have experiential access to the mother universe. We began to be able to go deep enough with our meditation, yoga, we our psychedelics, began to tap into the mother universe. And when we did that, we expected joy, bliss, ecstasy. Clearly, this is home. This is where we belong. This is where we want to be. And that leads, leads to a story of the fall and then salvation to get home. The whole project is to get home, to go back home, and that the ramifications of that are to value Transcendence over immanence, and devalue spirit over the physical body. I understand that and that that we have echoes of that. But I think now in the 20th century, 21st Century, now that science has pulled back the curtain and shown us how old the universe is and how big it is, we measure it in light years, 6 million million miles in one light year, and we measure it in billions and billions of light years, so big, so old, and so filled with genius that it doesn't really have the same appeal to say the goal is to leave it behind. And so the My Work what? And it's not my work. None of my sessions are my work. I just opened up and let the universe talk to me, and what it talks to me about is embodying spirituality, transforming the body, bringing it in deeper and deeper and deeper into the body that literally it changes our biochemistry. It changes it allows us not only to be healthier, but allows us to live longer. Sri Aurobindo thought it would take, his calculation was it would take 300 years of continuous spiritual practice before we could begin to become biologically self regenerating, and we could basically live forever in a human body. It doesn't need to break down, but we have to increase the energy within it, but first, we have to extend the life expectancy, to give us the 300 years to allow us to do that type of practice. His vision also is towards doing more and more and more spiritual stuff inside the beauty of the physical universe, to become co creators with the physical universe. Now, whether there are some aspects of this whole thing which are purely transcendental, sure, why not? You know how many physical universes are there? We don't know. We have reasons. We know. You know, we know. We don't know, so we don't know how big the entire arena is that we can incarnate into

Duane Elgin  2:43:27  
I'd like to reply to that as well. Wonderful question, very interesting question. First of all, I would point out that our universe, even though it's 13 point 8 billion years old in cosmic time. That's an just an instant, a cosmic instant. And my guess is that, in addition to, and not just my guess is that in addition to our universe, we are embedded within the life force of a of a mother universe. So we're a daughter universe embedded in the spaciousness of a mother universe. The mother universe is completely unbounded in terms of dimensional constraints. Here we are living in the second, third, fourth dimension, and that means we're just a couple of steps above a black hole. We're just getting started here, three dimensions, four dimensions. That's nothing in in the scale and the depth of the mother universe. And so a body is very useful. If you're going to be confined to 234, dimensions, get a body for that. But if you're living in the in the context of the mother universe and the the aliveness that goes vastly dimensionally beyond 234, dimensions into 200 300 400 dimensions, who knows what kind of vehicle is most appropriate? Fitting for that journey. So but here we are, though, we're just getting started. We're early in the in the evolutionary game, I think. And so let's embrace the physicality that we have, knowing that deeper and further in the evolutionary journey is the transcendent possibility of hyper dimensionality and new forms of being and learning and loving and living. So, yeah,

Chris Bache  2:45:30  
great. Your hand up.

Speaker 6  2:45:37  
Yes. Thank you both my dears, friends I would like to just build upon and add another thought to the question that was posed about I think, what can we do now? Whatever the masculine three things a numerical position and Chris, I loved what you said about each individual, because we're all, you know, unique expressions of the great whole will do something unique and different, all necessary and all absolutely equal in importance, absolutely and so to that, I want to say that while we're thinking of media and ways of doing hyper connectivity and broad scale connectivity to to understand that we are ourselves right between our ears is the Greatest motherboard of all. And any thought we have thought, I'm not even talking about words now, but any thought we have when we talk about morphogenetic fields is broadcast to these reaches of the universe to which you were just referring, Dwayne. There's no end point on this stuff. So if you want to start contributing as broadly and as powerfully as you can at this from this second on, become a great student of your own thoughts and learn to notice them and check in. Is this really what I want to be contributing, both to this being that's housed in this body, in terms of my physical, mental, spiritual, emotional health, but also, is this what I want to project out to uplift all of humanity and beyond, and if, if it is great, keep doing more of it. If it's not course correct, do a tweak here or there, elevate just a tad. And know that in that moment, you're doing a great and massive and infinite contribution. And to just add another thought, all of our encounters, however random or unimportant in quotes they may seem to be. And again, we all go to the grocery store and we say thank you to the clerk, if we're not scanning our own groceries just for a beat, hold that eye contact so that you know you've touched soul to soul, and trust that that reverberates out infinitely because that person we were both nourished by that interaction. Both of us connected. We found, you know, it's, it's what Ubuntu, you know, it's, I see you and you see me. Therefore we exist. So yes, yes, all of the big, loud and broad things we can do, but never underestimate that we can do all of that in an instant from where we are with what is in us right now.

Speaker 1  2:48:46  
Yes, amen. Thank you,

Bas de Cock  2:48:51  
beautiful contribution. Eve. Thank you so much, and it adds so much up to to our first wisdom keeper we had in our wisdom. Keep scattering cute curve and oh yes, speaking about the hologram and the information field, where we can add all our information, what we transmit directly to this information field, and and, and looking at the clerk, really sensing the souls, it's amazing information adding up to to the mind of the universe. So thank you for that. And if you want to see the former wisdom keepers gatherings in the chat box, you find the most upper parts the YouTube channel. So if you want to look look at back, feel free to do so. I feel we don't want to go home. We're already home, but we don't want to leave this setting, and that's a beautiful set of setting we created all together. I invite one more question, and then I have to be strict as a moderator. So if one feels very urgently want to ask a question or to share something, feel free to open up your microphone. Home. It's on a random occasion.

Chris Bache  2:50:04  
Let me try something. May I make a little different suggestion? Boss, I'd like to, and I'd like to just take this opportunity to the end, to thank the group, because I know that Dwayne and I have been carrying the weight of some of the discussion, but boy, what an extraordinary group this is. Yes, all each one of you have come into this moment in time with a long history, long series of development and the minds and the bodies and the awareness which you brought to this conversation made it the conversation that it became. I have expressed such deep appreciation, not only to bass and the mayo, but to all of you for coming together, for holding these questions, for for holding this driving force which is taking us all forward. Thank you. Thank you so very much.

Bas de Cock  2:50:56  
Yes, yes. Thank you. Chris. Bye,

Speaker 1  2:51:05  
I would like everybody to put a heart up on their screen and share a bit of love at the end.

Speaker 10  2:51:12  
I don't know how to do that,

Speaker 1  2:51:14  
under reactions, under reactions,

Bas de Cock  2:51:18  
or use your usual hands, okay, sending love from this space to all, and it's all felt as a community, dear family. Thank you for your contribution, the donation as a gift, as you all contributed, as it as a community. Beautiful energy is coming to the choosing Earth project, so send it tomorrow, and let's go on together as a family, and we see each other along. So thank you for joining and love from this space. Thank you. Chris Dwayne for your work and for your wisdoms. Thank you so much. Thank you.

Bas de Cock  2:52:13  
Bye, bye, everybody.

Speaker 3  2:52:14  
Namaste, everybody. Ciao, ciao. Ciao,

Bas de Cock  2:52:42  
you Nice seeing you again. Bridget David,

Speaker 1  2:52:48  
let's talk.

Bas de Cock  2:52:50  
It's long time go.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
