Marc Caron  0:22  
Hello and welcome to conscious living. My name is Mark Caron, and today I'm coming here live from the beautiful I'm awake Foundation Center where they do consciousness research and a lot of really interesting work in the field of spirituality, medicines, consciousness and transformation. I was blessed to be invited, and I'm actually broadcasting live from here today in this episode of conscious living radio where it's going to be another Spira plant medicine focused program, and I'm happy to invite my good friend and partner of the conference, Steven gray. And Steven always a pleasure to have you here. We're going to be airing our program today on 100.5 cfro FM in Vancouver, Co Op radio. We're happy to have been running that program for over 15 years now locally. And Steven, you've been a guest many times and really a co host in many programs. So thank you for joining me in what's I'm sure, going to be a really, really great conversation with our guests today,

Stephen Gray  1:26  
absolutely.

Marc Caron  1:29  
Well, Steven, I guess you know you're a man of many words today. Why don't you introduce our guest? You've done it many times, that's for sure.

Stephen Gray  1:39  
Yeah, happy to Well, that's partly because I have a big heart feeling toward Chris, but also an immense amount of respect for him as a person and for the work that he's done on behalf of the rest of us in elucidating central issues of our time. So Chris, I could ask you for a very brief synopsis of that 20 year journey, but maybe you'd allow me to stumble through it, and then you can sit back and smile and see if I got it right. So welcome to the people who are alive and those who are going to join us later. Chris Bache, the story I know about Chris is that he is now a retired professor of religion and philosophy, or religious studies and philosophy, from Ohio State University and Youngstown, Ohio. And early in his career, he Well, he he was always interested in mysticism and deep spiritual exploration, and he came upon the work of the legendary excuse me psychiatrist Stanislav Grof, who pioneered a protocol for working with high doses of LSD in particular. And Chris undertook what amounted to what turned out to be a 20 year journey of 73 high dose LSD sessions following the Stan Grof protocol. Those were sessions using 500 to 600 micrograms of LSD, which, for any of you who are not familiar with that kind of calculation, that's a high dose. And that protocol involves at home or in a, you know, safe, quiet space with headphones on and a carefully curated playlist, excuse me, eyeshades to keep block out the light so that inner visions are not obstructed or mitigated, and a qualified sitter. The person that he had, in this case, is a therapist, was a therapist, and so knew what she was doing with the situation and the following day. So he generally did this on a Saturday, and then the following day, again, following the Grof protocol, he spent basically the whole day, as far as I recall, with those headphones on again to kind of trigger memories of what was playing on the music when he had certain kinds of experiences and visions, and then meticulously transcribing all that. So Chris is the author of several books, including a book that I long before I ever met him, from 20 years ago or so called dark night, early dawn, which was really a really impressive book. I really liked it. Stand Out book. I still have it in my shelves back here the living classroom, which I have not read, and hope to because there's a new edition coming out, I believe, right. Chris, Yep, yeah. And the incredible LSD in the mind of the universe, subtitled diamonds from heaven, which many people have read now. So excuse me. I just want to add a little bit more about how I understand what happened in that 20 year journey. Mind you, this would be like an all day description. I. If it were to do justice to what happened. But the very, very short version is, and again, please correct the nuances of this if I didn't quite remember it correctly, Chris, in each one of those 73 journeys the first two hours was, as you described it in the book. I believe Chris at one point, sometimes exquisitely painful as you had to go through the difficult process, which most of us probably would never want to go through, actually, of ego dissolution and beyond, in a sense, beyond ego, personal, ego dissolution, but letting go of any kind of identity, even as a human as I recall. And then what happened? And again, please correct my language if I haven't got it quite right, Chris. But as I recall, and in my language, you broke out into what you have called in various ways, but one way is the vast intelligences of the universe. And believe me, folks, I this is no exaggeration. The kind of material that Chris, you might say, downloaded or brought back, is absolutely stunning and absolutely relevant to what's going on on the planet. One of the things that's most in my mind, anyway important and absolutely central about the things that Chris downloaded, as it were, is that, especially in the in the, I believe, the latter third or so of the 20 years, he started to get increasingly clear, and I would say, or interpret it as confident messages that we are, well, he had already heard, I guess, that we've been we are going through, as a species, a a death and rebirth trajectory or process that has been coming toward us for perhaps hundreds of 1000 years or whatever. And excuse me, but the confidence that I just mentioned implied that in the later years, as I recall Chris, these voices or this intelligence started indicating a greater likelihood that we would indeed somehow get through this and and that we will come out into what you might call a natural state of being on this planet, you've labeled it the birth of the future human. So there are so many questions we could ask you about that, but let me ask you a two part question to start with. First of all, correct me on anything that I didn't quite get right. And secondly, I've been thinking a lot about this, off and on. It's central to, you know, my life and where my mind wants to go. And so one thing that I'm wondering about is you have, I think you first said you thought this process might take hundreds of years before something you know, the light might shine again, so to speak. But I think it was in a either an email or a phone conversation in the last few months, you said you might have had to correct that to say 1000s of years, or more than 1000 years. So I'm trying to keep this simple and turn it over to you, but the context of that question that I'm going to put to you is that one of the things that I and I think Mark also is really tuned into, and probably you is that there's an incredible amount of energy going on right now on the planet to try to re correct that dis spiritual disconnection. So, you know, I guess the question is, is it really going to be a complete, you know, emptying and dying off over the next decades? Or might there be a cross fade where things start to lighten up, or, you know, the light starts to shine in more to counterbalance that dissolution, so to speak, species dissolution over the next decades. For example, pardon me one more little thing, because you know this, you're the person who turned Dwayne Elgin onto me for my book how psychedelics can help save the world. And he laid out sort of a possible scenario over the next six or seven decades that might result in what he called the birth of a mature planetary civilization. So how are you seeing all that now, timelines and all that?

Chris Bache  9:26  
Yeah, first Steven, thank you, buddy for that very nice and warm introduction. I really appreciate our friendship, and I appreciate the what you what you're doing with the conference, and mark you too. This is a great conference. It's my favorite psychedelic conference to participate in, and I always find it such a rich, rich setting and audience and soup to ask and answer, to address these types of questions, so to focus specifically in. Question you ask, I would strengthen the visionary component. It was really less like messages downloading as deep and profound immersion into transtemporal states of consciousness, going into what I call deep time, letting go, moving outside linear time, and also these, these visions started coming into me when I was a good 1214, years into my process. So a lot of things that happened before then, ego death, of entering into this collective suffering, of entering into what I think is some dimension of the collective unconscious of humanity, which stores all of its pain and suffering that humanity has experienced, just as an individual, stores their individual trauma, going through that and going into archetypal reality. And when I was in archetype of reality beginning this work, I began to be download a series of visionary encounters, which kept on showing me the same basic story that humanity was coming to a pivot point in its evolutionary journey, that this was that we're like the karmic streams of history were entering a canyon. We were about to go through a revolutionary pivot that would be retro. We would see it in time as a before and after, transformational event, of an event that was so powerful it was going to literally trigger a shift in the collective psyche of humanity, so that all beings born after this shift had taken place would be operating out of a different inner landscape, a different collective psychic landscape. And this was ra I just was completely unprepared for this, because I had begun this work thinking that this was about personal transformation, and then thinking it was about maybe personal awakening, spiritual awakening. But then I enter these profound collective territories, and then I began to have these visionary downloads about where the where the creative intelligence of the universe, or where the divine intelligence was taking humanity, where all this was going. And so there's these, these deep experiences of extraordinary spiritual awakening taking place at a collective level, extreme transformation, a deep intelligence working inside nature, inside history, underneath us all, bringing this about. And then, but it didn't show me how this was ever going to take place. It didn't show me the how of it. And then, in 1995 which look how long ago. This is almost 30 years ago. I went through a very deep experience in which I was dissolved well beyond egoic identity, dissolved into the human species, became one with the human family, and in that condition, experienced a the death and rebirth of humanity, a profound unraveling, a loss of control. It was a global systems crisis that seemed to be triggered by a cascading series of eco crises. It was, it was excruciating to experience, and it kept building in intensity. And I experienced this not as a human being, not as an individual human being, but I experienced this as the species. And then it seemed to be getting deeper and deeper. We were all forced into survival mode, and just when it was at its worst, the peak passed, and the dangers began to recede, and we began to pick ourselves up and to put the pieces back together. And when we did, we were changed. We found that something had been unleashed enough, something had been tapped into, something had been broken open at the very deep level of our being, so that when we began to build after this crisis, all of our work, all of our being, all of our relationships, were filled with new insights, new values, new understandings of the Human Project, and there was a creative contagion that where the work of individuals and collectives fed back into each other, that was just spiraling us into very quickly, in a into a new condition. I think now that's. Basic outline, and that's clear, but like Black Elk in the visions that he received as a young boy about the future of his people, the my visions did not come with dates and it did not come with a lot of detail. There were in a lot of attention paid to the mechanisms involved, but not to the specific pattern of causation other than this escalating global eco crisis, also, it did not come with dates, so I don't really have a sense of, Well, of from the visionary perspective, when this will happen, how long it will last. So in order to fill in all that information, I have to turn to the scientist in terms of their calculations for the depth and the speed with which the Eco crisis is moving. I turn to people like Dwayne Elgin, who has been processing all this information for decades. And I've come to first. I've been surprised that the crisis is coming at us as fast as it has. I thought we had more time, but it's coming out as fast. It's coming out as hard. We're still in the early stages, and I think Dwayne is right. The next 50 years are going to be absolutely pivotal in terms of the intensity of the ecological forces that will be bearing down on us that will have to be responding to. I don't think we have 1000 years if we don't address this. I don't think I think of this as kind of and again, I don't say this as a Psychonaut or as a visionary. I say this just as a person trying to understand historical information. I think this thing may take three or four generations, and if we don't make the pivot within that time frame, we may lose the planet. I think the 21st Century is the critical century that is going to bring us to our knees and force us to make choices that we're not willing to make now for a variety of different reasons. And then, and I think this is going to be such a deep pivot, it's going to be result in a shift in what I might call the plate tectonics of the collective psyche, a shift at the very, very core of our being. And in other ways. I think this represents a culmination of a reincarnational process which has been building for 1000s, 10s of 1000s, hundreds of 1000s of years. I think we've been gestating the next iteration of the human condition for all this time. We've been reincarnating learning, learning, exploring, growing, becoming more gestation is long. Labor is short and intense, life threatening. I think we've been in gestation for a long time, and we are entering into labor, which is it's going to be a volatile and very dangerous period. And I think we will give birth to this new human, this future human, many people have these are having this vision. They call it different things, Homo spiritualis, homo noeticus. But basically, there is this common intuition that something new is coming up underneath us. It's coming into expression underneath us, and it's being driven by the same intelligence that drove the creation of galaxies, the creation of the planet, the emergence of life on the planet, the emergence of conscious awareness on the planet. This is being driven from deep inside the process. Now, I think that we classically say there are no certain outcomes. Everybody has to exert full and complete exertion for us to get through this like labor. It's potentially life threatening, and mothers dying labor. Children die in labor all the time. I understand that. I really endorse that. And at the same time,

Chris Bache  19:07  
the entire trajectory of my psychedelic experience, particularly those in the last five years or so, took me so deep into the future with such realistic perception, and gave me experiences of what this future human will be like, and those touches of the future of humanity just bring me to my knees. They're so extraordinarily beautiful. It's, it's our deepest dreams come true, and I experienced this pivot as something which was yet to be accomplished, but also had already been accomplished. So that from deep time, I experienced this as an actuality that had taken place, and yet, from my linear time, it's an actuality which is yet. Be take place. And so in my heart, I don't doubt that humanity will make it through this transition. My concern is how many of our children, how many of the world's children will have to die before we come to our spiritual senses?

Stephen Gray  20:20  
So that definitely leaves it open for, as you say, incredible exertion, which is something that's really important to people like Mark and I very

Chris Bache  20:29  
important. Oh, yeah, you mentioned in that context. One of the thing, one of the things that this series, visionary series, showed me, is that as we enter deeper into crisis, the whole foundation of the psyche and our culture will be shifting into what chaos theoreticians would call nonlinear systems. Would there be so much energy, so much engagement to high energy engagement, that we would be shifting out of a linear dynamic of history into a nonlinear and in nonlinear, we know something about how nonlinear systems behave, and some of the characteristics, and one of the important characteristics is in a nonlinear condition, systems are particularly susceptible to small influences, small perturbations, and that means, as we go into this crisis, the actions of individuals will have proportionately greater impact than they would have had at earlier, more quiet periods of history, so the individual becomes a more dynamic player moving forward than individuals have been In the past.

Stephen Gray  21:40  
That's an incredibly important message for people. Go ahead, Mark, I see your mouth moving.

Marc Caron  21:48  
Well, you did partly answer what I was thinking a little bit, Chris, because, you know, there's so much you said there and then my question is, is, what can we do as individuals, as groups, as collective society. And you know, it's hard enough to organize important stuff in the world for a lot of people. How do you suggest that we move forward from starting as Me to We, to the many what, what do you think is a good approach for that?

Chris Bache  22:25  
Yeah, you know, I think they're probably people who are better qualified and more skilled at filling in that particular place. Piece of, how can we respond? I mean, I know Dwayne Elgin is really good at that. Other people are really focused on, how can we move forward, dynamically, creatively in this process, and so I'd rather not Barbara Marx Hubbard was great. Remember on her wheel and all the different professions, I think it's going to take all of us to get through this. Take all the scientists, all the educators, all the politicians, all the artists. It's going to take every one of us and all the skills that we bring to our various livelihoods to move into this. What I would offer is the metaphysical perspective that comes from reincarnation research and without going into the data supporting us, but the basic vision is, when we incarnate, we choose our incarnation. We choose the time and place and circumstances of our birth. And therefore it's it's an axiom of my thought that all the human beings on the planet right now knew what they were getting into when they chose to incarnate in this century under these very demanding circumstances, and they chose to incarnate with a specific kind of karmic agenda, with a specific sense of how to contribute. So I think each one of us needs. All we need to do is look deeply, look under our feet, to look at where we are, who we are, how we are positioned. And the question is not really, I think, how do we find the right thing to do? I think the deeper question is, will we have the courage? Where do we find the courage to do what we discover that we can do absolutely. The essence of this pivot is a pivot into oneness, an awakening of oneness underneath our feet, which will completely change technology, how we apply technology, international conflict, social relationships, organization of society that fundamental awakening in the human heart, the healing of the human heart, and awakening, awakening into a true, deep, vivid, mystical experience of the fundamental oneness of all life. And that means that's an inclusive vision. And so. So as we move toward that time in history and back into ecological balance, of course, a oneness that includes all living species on the planet, the more we become the human being that is trying, that the Earth needs right now, that culture needs right now, the more we accelerate the transformation of this, this transformational change in our own role in it, we must become the future being that Earth needs, and as we do, we enter into synergistic relationship with other beings who are also working to become what the planet needs right now. Yeah, beautiful, that's not very most specifics. There are other people who are better with specifics,

Stephen Gray  25:47  
right? Well, I I agree with you, you know, I mean, in the sense that we don't know what people need to do. And if I may dare, a bit of a provisional answer about that, I've got Mark interested in this term that I got from Steve and her at Buhner, which I believe he translated from William Blake, which is follow the golden thread. And so, you know, obviously, I mean, think we all know as a it's almost a platitude in some ways, that the inner work is the foundation for moving out into the outer work, and that one would hope that if the inner work is being done properly effectively, then you can follow the golden thread, or, as they sometimes say, let go and let God, and then it's like, that's, I think, another central component of this revision that we're dealing with is we're moving hopefully, we need to move from sort of head based calculation of how to move through the world to heart based, or intuitive based, you know, through that. And then I'll just add one more thing before tossing it back to you, if I may, Chris, one of our other speakers, Mary Sanders, just sent me the title of her talk for the spirit plant matters conference, conference for this year, and it's reimagining collective care as a path to liberation. And seems to me that's another central component of it. You know, you talk about us moving toward oneness, so the recognition of the power of connection and shared vision and shared prayer. You might even say, shared manifestation seems to me central to this movement forward.

Chris Bache  27:27  
Yeah, I think

Marc Caron  27:29  
I just wanted to add one more thing, if I could, gentlemen, because Steven, you said something about, you know, you mentioned the head and you mentioned the heart. And I think we have so much wisdom and knowledge, you know, education type knowledge, that it's when we lead that with our heart is so much more powerful because, you know, we can just repeat what we hear, what we read and what we learn, but it's a in my experience, you know, in terms of when I share, I know when I'm in my head and I'm in my heart, and the difference that it makes in rapport and relating, and same as when somebody's presenting or you're working with someone, you know the difference between that and it kind of reminds me of a quote that I always loved hearing that made a lot of sense was the longest journey you'll ever take is the one between your head and your heart.

Chris Bache  28:29  
Yeah, now I would add the third piece, and that is the body of the body's wisdom. And of course, this is the context within head and heart meet. And of course, one of the reasons we're in so much trouble in terms of the planet is we're just our theologies and philosophies had tended to aim us away from the body, away from physical embodiment, away from the Earth, and ignoring the messages that we've been getting from the earth. And so it the an opening of the heart at that level, an opening of the mind at a level, and an opening of our body to our body as a cell in the body of the planet. So lots of levels going on all at the same time. Yeah, very interesting,

Marc Caron  29:21  
yeah. And to add to that, if I may, because the body, of course, is the connector between spirit and and the planet, with the importance of of food and what we put in our body. So you know, our conference called Spirit plant medicine, all plants have spirit, whether it be broccoli, cannabis, Iboga, mushrooms, whatever it is. And the importance, I think, for us to get back to clean, nutritious food that isn't contaminated in the same way lets our body work in a much better way. And when we acknowledge this, plants the spirit. Of the plants, whether it be a psychedelic medicine or something psychoactive, to something that's just something to nurture our body for nutrition and health and vitamins and all the things that we need. In a good way, makes that connection even more powerful. And I feel that, you know, in so many ways, when we look at the mass population of, you know, just say, North America. You know, the quality of our store bought food is, you know, really beautiful we all need to become aware of,

Stephen Gray  30:30  
yeah. So no more beer and pizza mark, no.

Marc Caron  30:33  
Well, everything in moderation. I have to believe it's like, you know, every now and again you have to have a zag or not, but you understand what I'm saying. It's just what you put in is,

Stephen Gray  30:46  
of course, no, that's really important. When I think, you know, Chris, you might have things to say about that, but I'd like to try leading you in another direction, if I may, just before my no Mark's going to want to turn it to questions soon. You know, you've spoken, obviously about the birth of the future human. And there's a, there's a kind of humorous saying from the famous baseball catcher and pitcher from the Yankees, from way back when Yogi Berra, who was prone to these sort of malapropisms that ended up kind of making sense anyway, and one of them was something like, If you don't know where you're going, you might end up somewhere else. So it's a sort of like a two part question. It's like, and I don't even know if you can answer this, I don't want, I know you don't want to step beyond the bands, bounds of your knowledge. But what you know, we've talked about this before. How would you describe what the awakened human looks like, in terms of how they move in the world and so on, and what might be the kinds of signs of awakening that people might look for? And it's on this principle, if you don't know where you're going, kind of idea, right? Like, I think it is helpful and correct me anyone if I'm wrong, but to have some kind of signpost is, what is the natural human being looking like? What is the birth of the future human, or with a future human looking like?

Chris Bache  32:12  
Yeah, well, I think our spiritual traditions have been giving us insights into what's emerging, I think all of the great saints and sages that were responsible for establishing or starting seeding the religions of the Axial Age, one of the things that drew us to them, Drew humanity to them is because we could feel a deep resonance with them. And they were kind of the prototypes, archetypal prototypes of what we were becoming, and they invited us to become what they had become. And in that way, I think, in the Buddhas and the prophets and the Christ and the great saints of all the deepest spiritual traditions, we can see the prototypes of what's coming so and the difference is, I think that some people have said, and I agree, that the age of individual enlightenment is over. Now it's collective enlightenment or death. You know, it's a collective game. So the dynamic that's so unusual is the entire that nature seems, at least in my experience, visionary experience, nature seems intent on awakening the entire species to really and the entire species is going to go through what individual mystics have gone through in their individual awakening. The individual mystic goes through the dark night of the soul, a period of intense purification, offloading past karma, past negativity or behavior, en route to entering into a clear state of awareness, which we would call spiritual awakening, or enlightenment, or something along those lines. I think humanity as a whole was going is going through, or will be going through, is beginning to go through a collective dark night of the soul, a period of profound purification of confronting what we might think of as the sins of our fathers, which are our sins, because we are our own fathers in this way, but going through a tremendous kind of purification process in order to clear out our basement, so to speak, in order To make us more receptive to increasing energies entering us at this from the spiritual dimension at this time in history. Now, another way of putting this, and it ran through my sessions, is, I think the future human. I think we're coming to a pivot point in our reincarnational story. Story. We've been reincarnating. We die. We expand to soul. We incarnate. We contract into ego. We expand to soul. We contract into ego. And we just keep this up for 1000s and 1000s and 1000s of years. And we're learning and we're growing. And sometimes we step back, and mostly we step forward, but we keep on learning and growing. And enlightenment is the Eastern traditions have tended to see enlightenment, this culminating in enlightenment. But if we really look at what that means and and often they think, they've tended to place it in a context, you become enlightened, and then you can leave you leave time and space. You leave Samsara, who wants to be in time and space when you can be in the bliss of eternity. But I think that's a short sighted understanding of what's taking place. Now that we have a better understanding of how big the universe is, how old it is, and how complex it is, it doesn't really make much sense to think that after all these hundreds of 1000s of years of evolving humanity the point of individuated consciousness, and about just 5000 years ago, humanity begins to sink down at that depth layer where they begin to tap into that dimension of their own mind, which is one with the mind of all living things, just at that point, 5000 years after we've developed writing, then when we achieve spiritual awakening, then we leave, we just leave it all behind. I don't think that's what's happening. I think now we're beginning to have a deeper understanding, and that is, we've been reincarnating, reincarnating, reincarnating. And I think we are at a time when all of our former lives are beginning to come together. They're they're beginning to come to us. And as they come together, they bring forward, of course, all their unfinished business, which becomes our unfinished business. And this is happening collectively. And when this process reaches critical stage, at least, this is how it unfolded in my session. So I just, I asked the listeners indulgence. There was a time when all my former lives started coming into me fast and furious, and they were fusing. And I've done a lot of past life therapy work, so I'm familiar with a lot of them, but they were just coming in, coming in, and then they seemed to fuse. They hit a critical mass. And when they hit a critical mass, there was an explosion of diamond light out of my chest, and it catapulted me into a state of consciousness where I was an individual, but an individual beyond any frame of reference that I had ever imagined before. And I think what I was being shown or taken into was what happens to an individual when they reach this turning point in their evolutionary journey where all of our former lives come together and fuse, and a new identity is born. And this identity, I think, is the identity of the soul. But it's not the soul that we encounter after we die. It is that, but it's the soul in a human incarnation, in the earth, in the body. And this is what I call the birth of the diamond soul. That is, I think, the future human will be a human being, where the operating identity will not be any individual, private identity, not 100 year old identity, but it'll be 100,000 year old identity. We will have a sense of ourselves, a living, conscious memory of ourselves as a being that's been living in and out of time for 1000s and 1000s of years, and a s any being who is just larger has a deeper sense of themselves, a deeper sense of relationships with other human beings, because if they remember their former lives, they remember their relationships that they're they were all involved in. And as we have been male female, we've been every race imaginable, every religion imaginable, and all of these differences are coming together and fusing to produce an individuality that holds all of that as an integrated, harmonious singularity, okay, that I think is, is the best take I have on the future human. And I can tell you that when I was taken toward the end of my journeys into the deep time and was given the grace of experiencing this new archetype, this future human, it just it moved me to tears. Was so beautiful. So I mean, picture a humanity completely healed of all the wounds of history, completely healed of all the divisions that we've etched in history, a humanity with an open, expansive, compassionate heart like the best of the saints through history, humanity with their consciousness open into deep communion with the creative intelligence of the universe, with fewer interfering Bardo echoes, shadows in the in the way, and a human being who is deeply committed to being in the body, not trying To get out of time and space, but living increasingly strong, focused, intentional life, an integration of spirit and matter inside their physical existence. That's kind of the bit. That's what has been coming into me. That's what I have to offer.

Stephen Gray  40:59  
That was absolutely beautiful. Chris, you know, I think I'm going to play this back to myself with headphones on, just before bedtime for a beautiful bedtime story, and before a beautiful

Chris Bache  41:12  
story, we really are. It is ordinary, hard times ahead, but deep beauty.

Stephen Gray  41:19  
We need that kind of encouragement. Chris, this is such a gift that you offer to people. You know, it puts me in mind of something Bishop Desmond Tutu once said, that is the problem with most people, is they don't believe in the possibility of possibility. We need people to take heart. We need people to believe that what they do, as you say, matters more than ever, right? Yeah. Anyway, I'm guessing, Mark you'd like to open it up to some questions,

Marc Caron  41:47  
yeah, and just a second. I just wanted to add to that, because I believe that, you know, as human beings, we can do so much more than that. We think we can do. We have such an ability to push through, to persevere, to, you know, I don't mean work hard, as in, you know, crazy, but we can do more than we think we can do, and it's by pushing that limit, by pushing ourselves. Is, you know, how we build the muscles? You don't go to the gym. Build Muscle, you know, light and few reps, you've got to push through the pain, and, you know, the challenging, the things that are making it build. And I think it's something that you know, in some cases, and I can speak for myself personally, that we sometimes you get a little soft, you know, and to remember that we have the ability to be able to have that strength to push through. So before we go to two questions, I have one question that some people may be thinking, I don't know if anybody will ask, and I know I've asked this question of you before, Chris, but you've done such an amazing work on 72 high dose journeys, and as a professor of religious studies, most people would think that's not what a professor of religious studies would be doing, because you know the stigma of what LSD might be seen as, what Made you what inspired you to choose that direction or that path for this deep dive philosophical work. And what would you say to anybody who, after hearing what you've done and experienced, is there anything that you would say to them in terms of, you know, some sage advice,

Chris Bache  43:40  
starting at Vienna, my advice is, please don't do it. Don't do it the way I did it. I was young and foolish. I know I understand much more now than I did then. I would advise a different protocol. But how I got into this is a simple story. I came out of graduate school kind of an atheistically inclined agnostic in philosophy of religion, but I've had a long, lifelong, passionate desire to ask the big questions and to seek the big answers. I mean, I really wanted to understand how life works, what's going on, what's Why is life filled with so much suffering? What's is there an intelligence inside the universe expressing itself? I really wanted to answer those questions if I could. And right after I finished graduate school, I met the work of Stan Grof and his work, realms of the human unconscious changed my life, and very quickly, was followed in 1980 BY HIS Manual LSD psychotherapy. And I just, I knew I wanted, I wanted to do this work. I needed to do this work. I don't like breaking the law, but I would. I went underground, basically in part of the transitional underground generation that did this work, and I started doing the high dose work. First. Us a matter of efficiency. That is, I was still thinking it was a personal model, and I knew the sessions would be more intense, but it would turn up more of my psyche, and I would, if I could manage the intensity, I would clean up my shit faster, and I'd get to enlightenment faster. Turns out all my assumptions were wrong. Is not about personal and and when you work with high high doses, you activate a larger piece of the fabric of existence, and your what may begin is your individual transformational process becomes part and parcel of humanity's larger collective transformational process. But then when, when I began to understand some of this, three or four years into the process, I found that I had developed a taste for working with high doses. I was able my constitution was wired such that I seemed to have the ability to get very large and spacious, and very importantly, I had the ability to contract safely at the end. And this is, you know, not everybody, you know, a lot of people shouldn't work with psychedelics at all, and a lot of people should not work with high doses of a powerful psychedelic like LSD. So this is, you know, and I would do it differently, even if you have a natural aptitude, even if you have the capacity, even if you have the strong social setting that supports you. In this work, I would be much gentler. I would be a Gen take a gentler way in I'd work with more lower doses. I would balance the occasional high dose with integrating lower doses. I'd work with not only LSD, but I'd balance it with working with Psilocybin or Ayahuasca, the vegetative psychedelics. So there's just a lot of things I would do differently, yeah,

Stephen Gray  47:00  
but, but, you know, you can't answer this question, of course, because it's the road not taken. But you know, just speculatively, would you have been able to bring back such deep and powerful information had you not put yourself through this fire?

Speaker 1  47:18  
It? I It,

Chris Bache  47:24  
it, I found that it takes a lot of work and a lot of discipline in order. When you go very deep in the universe, and you transcend so many levels of time and space and identity and species identity and into archetypal and beyond archetype reality, you're breaking into so many layers of new territory that it's very hard to stay conscious at those levels, and often people only bring back pieces. But if you work consistently and with discipline, you can learn how to stay conscious at those levels, and you can bring back more and more, but it's a discipline. It's really, for me, it's a philosophical discipline to really, not only engage and break into new territory, but to bring the experiences back and get them down in writing or art or music, different people in different modalities, but to bring them inside one's being to learn to live by the insights that they give you. So I may not have gone out as far as I ended up going out, but I also learned that going out is not everything that I thought it was going to be in the early stages. I thought that the farther out you went, the more profound the impact would have and allow you to hold and change your life, and you'd become an enlightened being and and so depth was related to, if you if you did it right, was related to stabilizing the impact of these deep immersions. What I learned is that it's a much more complicated process than I had initially thought. The process of retaining and holding on to those experiences is much bigger than simply remembering them. To integrate a journey is different than integrating individual sessions, and I found that the task of integrating such a radical journey, it will take me lifetimes. I think, integrate where I went, and I don't think I could ever integrate them in that sense of being able to hold them, enter them, live from them. During my current lifetime, this just the universe is too big, and it took me in too deeply to sort of hold it well.

Stephen Gray  49:59  
I thank you. Deeply. The for having done that work for us anyway. I know you wouldn't start out to do it for quote, us, but it turned out that way.

Chris Bache  50:07  
Turned out that way. Yeah,

Marc Caron  50:09  
I like the comment on efficiency. So we have comment here in the chat. Melanie White says, Thank you, Chris. She loved the book LSD in the mind of the universe. And thank you for sharing your insights with us tonight. And I think that'd be a great segue for those of you watching online, maybe just the live streams, after the factor even live right now, we have a studio audience here in our zoom where we're going to take some questions. We do have a question here from Jacob. Michael, if you can bring Jacob in, we'll unmute him and we'll hear what he has to ask. Welcome to the program, Jacob. Thanks for for joining us and asking a question.

Speaker 2  50:57  
Yeah, thank you. It's going to be my first spirit plant medicine conference this year. So very exciting to kind of join you beforehand. I was deeply struck by the book Christopher and it articulated a process that I seem to find myself in some of the early stages of not to presuppose that it would go in the same direction, but certainly I'd never encountered anybody who had been dropping into those collective levels. And yeah, much, much more to say about the richness of the work. But the question I wanted to put to you is really whether you'd really encountered like, how does this process and journey for you relate to Christology, or did you have kind of Christ avatar experiences, and how does that kind of map On to the process for you?

Chris Bache  52:00  
Yeah, interesting question, Jacob, there have been two religious traditions, or spiritual traditions, that have had the largest influence on my life. The first was Christianity, and the second is Buddhism. And I also taught world religions for decades, and so I spent semester after semester, going around the planet, in my mind, with my students doing a huge, you know, Huston Smith kind of journey in and out of the world religions. And I, they just all became, they became passionate lovers for me. And each one of them taught me so much. And while I started, in a sense, within the Christian framework, I also began to understand over time that Christ is the fruition of a spiritual impulse in the Middle East that parallels in certain seminal ways, the fruition of the Spiritual impulse in India, the fruition in Africa, the fruition in South America, that I began to see larger patterns. So for me, if Christology is the study of the Christ archetype, for me, that archetype is bigger than Jesus, but it kind of, it's a larger dynamic of profound awakening of the human heart, profound awakening of the of the mind, of the Spirit. So I just, kind of, I live and breathe in in kind of the Universalist waters, which, on the one hand, recognizes the distinctness of each of the lineages, but also recognize the or the overlapping common ground. Now, I, you know, I didn't have a lot of experiences of Avatar kind of beings or angelic beings, or even spirit guys. I didn't have, you know, the machine elves encounter that people do at the DMT and I didn't have a lot of experience of individuated beings in my journey. And I know that a lot of people do, and so I don't question that there the universe is filled with beings that we often counter in psychedelic sessions. My sense is that the nature of the work I did. My sense is that maybe this is a hypothesis. You have to be a being, to experience beings, you have to be a self to experience cells in the universe. And if your work grinds you fine, just grinds you repeatedly into dust. Then when that dust goes out into the universe, it sort of takes you into the fabric of life. Rather than putting you into individual dialog with individual pieces of life, even deeply spiritual, large pieces of life, so I was drawn into archetypal dynamics, archetypal dimensions I was drawn into, and I always was in. There was a consciousness guiding my sessions. I always felt in the hands of some massive consciousness. But this consciousness never appeared to me in any kind of concrete, physical, this type of form. I felt it as a presence. It guided me deeper and deeper and deeper. It was open ended and infinite, but didn't distill itself into particular forms. So was that. You see how that kind of gets complicated around Christology, on the one hand, it affirms the deep essence of it. On the other hand, it it doesn't get concretized into our historically specific expressions.

Stephen Gray  56:08  
Yeah, was there a visual component to these journeys?

Chris Bache  56:13  
Very strong visual components, not hallucinatory. I mean, I could pull off my eye shades in the middle of the journey, and I was not hallucinating, but very, very deep visual components, yes, but I never saw the intelligence that I was experiencing so intimately. I mean, this intelligence would draw me into it would purify me and beat me up and crush me and destroy me again and again. And then, when I'd gone through the purification process, it would receive me and take me and educate me and take me through things over and over again until it was sure that I understood what it wanted me to know. And then it would take me on deeper but it never adopted a form that I could identify as such? Wow,

Speaker 2  57:08  
could I do a brief, brief follow up question?

Marc Caron  57:11  
Sure nobody else has their hands up, so go for it cool.

Speaker 2  57:17  
Your work also resonated a lot for me with that of Pierre Tolle, hard de Chardin, and I wondered if you're like to what, how did, how do you feel his work kind of mapping with your sense of this kind of as an EPO birth period? Yeah, I just assuming you're familiar with his realms.

Chris Bache  57:39  
And isn't it striking, the overlap, I mean, really the profound insights that he had to humanity coming to a turning point and the news sphere. And, you know, he was trained as a geologist, and so he had this large historical landscape, and with his deep natural spirituality and his deep Christian faith, he saw so much, and I think there is an overlap. And I had read, you know, Chardin in graduate school, and I had read many spiritual teachers and many, but I don't think they, I mean, just to sort of anticipate a question that some readers might have, I don't think it shaped my experience of what actually happened in the sessions. It helped me understand and interpret what happened in the sessions. But the Sessions had their own generative power, which seemed to be drawing from a different kind of source, but that sardin saw as much as he sell all on his own in his non amplified capacity. Just awesome. Just awesome.

Marc Caron  58:50  
Yeah. Well, thank you so much for the question Jacob. And if anybody else has any questions for Chris, now is the time if you want to raise your digital can turn your camera on, we'd be happy to take your question. Looks like we're good, or you can raise your physical hand, oh, there we go. Jackie, are you good? There we go. We'll ask you to unmute here.

Speaker 3  59:17  
Awesome. Hi, Chris, Hi, Jackie,

Speaker 4  59:24  
so this is maybe, like you had said, in terms of, like, the movement of the planet and all the urgency and what direction we move into that there are people better suited, maybe, to fill in the details, but I'm thinking about like, what are the things that might be happening now in terms of accelerating shifts in consciousness, like, are there things is, are psychedelics part of that, you know, Stevens book, can psychedelics help change the world? How do we stabilize those things? And I'm, I'm thinking about, like, I know. There are groups of meditators, deep meditators, for example, who are working with low dose five Meo as a kind of ally for achieving nature of mind meditation, or a kind of idea that somehow these excursions can help us restructure so that we can contain more or have more capacity for these shifts in consciousness. So I'm just curious your thoughts on that like, not that I know, of course, you can't advocate that everybody go do psychedelics, but just what your thoughts are like if you had a workshop, what would you train people to do?

Chris Bache  1:00:38  
Well, first I just want to a big yes to everything you're saying. I think we're all hardwired into the collective psyche. I mean, it's we are truly embedded our individual life is a cell within the life of our species, physically at a physical, biological level, and also at a mental level, spiritual level. So everything we do registers in the collective psyche, and the collective psyche shapes everything that we do. I mean, it creates the structures and the territory. So an extreme example is, I think when I die, I take my psychedelic experiences with me, but I also think that the species mind will keeps it too, because I was a human being when I had these experiences, so they become part of the human family of experience, and therefore they continue to even if I never reincarnated again, these experiences would be alive within the human family, and this is true for all of us. Everything we're doing continues to live. So the harm that we bring into life registers in the human family, the healing that we bring into life, the insights that we bring, the care and compassion that we bring, all kind of infuse the network of life that is the human family and beyond the human family. So, yeah, I think that when we work as the spiritual traditions tell us there is no such thing as private spiritual practice. So you know, the first thing you do in Buddhist tradition, when you do a practice is you cultivate bodhichitta, or the desire to save or to in to help all sentient beings. The last thing you do at the end of the practice is you distribute the merit to all levels of being, all six levels of the Bardo, to all levels. So you're constantly the trap that we can get caught in is to think that it's all about some personal enlightenment or personal exercise, and the spiritual traditions are telling us just the opposite. It's not about You dummy, it's all of us. It's all of us. So open your heart, open your mind, let the pain in, bring the healing out, and when we do that, I think we can just trust that everything we're doing is being conserved and used by the other beings who are alive at this point in time. In fact, that's one of the things I'm going to be talking about at the conference, because in my life, I was an academic. I had to keep all this work completely hidden. I never let my students knew know what I was doing. I was always, you know, that was a private part of my life, but I found that my students began to be activated by my psychedelic work, and they there was a certain transparency opening between their mind and my mind, and I began to understand it was as if my students were showing me that what I had experienced about the nature of consciousness, that ultimately it's all one integrated consciousness. It was as if what was happening in my classroom was demonstrating that this is true, and eventually it forced me to learn an entirely new way of teaching that was respectful of these quantum fields that were emerging in our work together. So there is no such thing as private practice. There is no such thing, you know, we're all in this together. We're arm in arm. Everything we do serves everyone in the process.

Speaker 2  1:04:21  
Beautiful. Thank you.

Marc Caron  1:04:23  
Thank you. Thank you for that question. Jackie was coming in from Philadelphia. It's really great to see people coming in from different parts of the world. We have another one person joining us from Salisbury, UK, different parts of Well, here's Albuquerque, New Mexico. Albuquerque. Technology, all right. Michael K, Michael K, has a question. I'll unmute you here. Michael, there we go. Oh, you're muted. You're not at your you'll have to, there you go. You'll have to put the request.

Speaker 1  1:04:58  
There you are. Hello, everyone. You. Hello. Yeah, I'm calling from Lake, Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, and Chris, I wanted to focus on your experience in the collective of the human species and relating that to individual efforts today. And you mentioned that you carry hope for the future. You were that we will come through this birthing process. But could you expand a little bit more on the relationship between the individual and collective and de with what you just said? And the final comments on the last question, do you think that the right inspiration from the right individual will spread much faster in the future into the collective consciousness, with acceptance, far faster than it has been in the past.

Chris Bache  1:05:51  
Yeah, where if we, if we just look at what's going on around us right now, you know, America's in a presidential election, and we see a deeply divided country, and we couldn't have candidates more polar opposites than the candidates we have in such deep polarization of political of the political spectrum, and we see this in so many different areas of discourse. So it is extraordinary, very turbulent, choppy, uncertain times, and I it's not just the truth that catalyzes connections with greater truth, but also lying catalyzes lying, you know, and darkness catalyzes darkness. So the collective this dynamic between the individual and the collective is not simply a sunny side of the street dynamic. It also applies to the darker side of the street, and we see this in in shamanic cultures, where they are dealing not just with healing, but they're also dealing with dark forces and managing them or controlling them. I think, however, that Carl Jung is right that nature tilts towards growth. I think it tilts towards us becoming more than we are, larger than we are, wiser than we are more intelligent than we are. Nature tilts towards growth. And I think that if nature is trying to bring about this pivot towards this higher form of consciousness, emerging even though we are experiencing tremendous upheaval from the at the collective level, politically, socially, culturally, I think the deeper movement is towards higher, better, truer, clearer, better, good, More good. And so I think that if nature favors growth, that individuals who have made the transition in their own being, that humanity is trying to make collectively, I think of those individuals as becoming kind of seed catalyst. Their very presence helps catalyze what's trying to emerge out underneath our feet at a collective level. So I do think that individuals have tremendous power to influence, not just physically, not just by physical contact, but all the spiritual traditions have recognized that there is a subtler form of influence that radiates around people when they do deep spiritual practice. That's why the Chinese traditions always valued having a contemplative practicing in their community outside of town. The Christian monasteries and nunneries have always understood that their work, their spiritual practice had a beneficent influence on the surrounding communities, so I think that's going to be increasing as we move forward. Beautiful.

Marc Caron  1:09:11  
Great question. Thank you for that, Michael. And I think unless anybody else raises her hand in the next you know, half a second or so, we'll, we'll start wrapping up our program. And Chris, I first I want to just thank you for you know, the work that you do, and let you know how much I appreciate you. I've got to know you over the past number of years, as you've been a great supporter of their spirit, plant medicine, conference and your graciousness, your wisdom, your energy, and that of your beautiful wife, Christina, as well. You know it's just it's so beautiful to be in your presence and to hear your words and bring take that in. So I just want to let you. How grateful I am for you and the work that you do, and I'm going to have to pay you later when you get up here, Chris, you know, at the beginning, you said it's one of the best psychedelic conferences ever. So thank you for that. Which leads into a segment that I just wanted to share with people that you know, if you're here in the Zoom Room and you're watching, and you're thinking about coming to the conference, or you're not sure, or you're watching online, one of the things that we do is bring in this virtual aspect, so that we can be live in person, maybe not in person, but we have a virtual community where you can connect with each other, you can have questions and answers with the speakers in the room as well. We bring in. Chris was one of our surprise guests last year who came in and talked to some folks in the room. And, you know, just have that different way of connecting and being able to participate, because not everybody we understand can come and join us physically. There's always limitations and time frames, but if you can join us in person, we'd love to see you there, and we love to see you in the virtual room. And the bonus of the virtual stuff too is you get replays, and you can come back into the membership and you can catch up on it, instead of just getting that one hit from the room in a physical presence. So thank you so much for your work, Chris, I really appreciate the support of you and your beautiful wife with our conference. And I got a shirt for you because I know the ones you like,

Chris Bache  1:11:29  
Ah, good, yeah, I've worn the other ones so much they're getting worn out. So a new shirt is

Marc Caron  1:11:36  
good. You know, the only one is a fun side note, but it's true. I was at the unicorn Music Festival, for those who don't know, and John, and John Stockton is he's a beautiful soul, and he's a lawyer from the days of cannabis and everything else. I had seen him for a while. And he comes up to our, our tent and stuff at the at the conference, and he's wearing the same shirt, the green tree shirt, and like you said, Chris, it was all worn out. He loved it. It it was one of his favorite shirts, so he had to set him up with another just a funny story as a sidebar for that. But if there's anything that you want to add, Steven or Chris before we wrap it up, that would be great.

Stephen Gray  1:12:16  
Well, excuse me, I'm assuming you'll say a little bit more about ways that people can join the conference mark. But also, I have a particular question for a friend of mine who lives in Switzerland and wanted to catch this interview, but it'll be 2am there right now, or when this started. And so how can he see this later? Because, and the other thing I want to say to anyone who's still with us now, plus anyone who sees this later, is if you, if you heard the things that Chris said, said today, along with perhaps other information that he has shared, this is absolutely important for our planet right now to hear these things that Chris is saying absolutely central and at the very least, I mean, you know, the basic ground of that, in a sense, is the encouragement and sort of upliftingness that's going to be needed as we go through these, you know, increasingly challenging times on the material level. I mean, there's going to be no doubt you know what's already happened, and it will increase further is deeper levels of anxiety and depression and confusion and tendencies to grasp on to, you know, unreasonable hopes, such as, you know what's going on in the Maga movement, for example, etc, etc. So I my my dream, my hope, is that 1000s and 1000s of people will watch this interview. And so starting with my friend Craig in Switzerland, how can he tune into it?

Marc Caron  1:13:52  
Mark, well, what a great question. Steven, thanks for asking. It's really simple. First off, for anybody who signed up, we're going to send out an email with the link, direct link. But you can check out our spirit plant medicine YouTube channel. It's streaming there live as we speak. You can check out our Facebook page as well. It's streaming live there as we speak. And so they're always there for replays after the fact. And if you're inspired or moved by what you're hearing, please. Please share it with your friends. Share it far and wide, and that helps the algorithms as well in the social media platforms to, you know, start showing it more and more. So it's really important that if there's something here that moved you, please, you know, find those and share them far and wide, so it's easy to find, and we'll send out some email reminders.

Stephen Gray  1:14:45  
And I would like to put in one final pitch for people to attend the conference, because of the, again, the kinds of things that Chris has been sharing is that we are moving into a collective journey. And quite honestly, this is not really a sales pitch. I don't see it that way. It's a, it's a, it's a call to a gathering. I've been I've been tending to think of the conference as an empowerment hub, now that we can support and empower and encourage each other by meeting, whether it be, you know, they can only make it virtually or even better. Of course, in person, it's, it's, it's part of the collective journey that we're working with here.

Marc Caron  1:15:24  
Yeah, yeah. And I

Chris Bache  1:15:27  
can jump in and just heartfelt plug for the conference, because, I mean, truly, I just love going to the conference. It's an intimate conference. It's not like, god bless maps. You know, it's not like the 13,000 mega conferences. This is a group of dedicated practitioners working with many therapeutic modalities, with many substances as opportunities for conversations and a lot of new things get open there. I release diamonds, LSD in the mind of the universe in 2019 I think it was right. We got it early release there. And now at this conference, I'm going to be releasing, as part of my presentation, the new edition of the living classroom, which is the first time that I'm able to really tell the story of the role of psychedelics that psychedelic played in the the ideas that I wrote about in the original version of 2000 in of the living classroom in 2008 where I thought it was best to keep psychedelics out of the story. So there's just, there's new material that comes forward, new ideas, and there's just nothing like the contagious quality of being in the room with like minded people and the interactions and exchanges that take place. It's just, it's just a really, a wonderful, wonderful place to be.

Stephen Gray  1:16:55  
Hey, Chris, have you been talking to Colin at all about getting that book in time for the conference, yes.

Chris Bache  1:17:02  
Oh, good. I think we're going to have it in time. It's going to be an advanced release. I don't know whether we'll have the paperback. I don't think the paperback is going to be out. And so that means it's going to be a bit pricey, because it'll be the hard back, you know, and it's SUNY press, State University of New York Press and but, yeah, we will have copies there. I wish we were going to have the paperback, but that won't be out for another year.

Stephen Gray  1:17:32  
Hey, Mark, maybe we could offer a slight special discount ticket price if they purchase the book at the same time.

Marc Caron  1:17:42  
Well, that's a good one. I'm not sure how I would rip that out of my mind right now.

Chris Bache  1:17:47  
Warn you, it's a pricey I don't remember exactly what it is, but it's, it's aimed at libraries. You know, the heart of that challenge is, yeah, it was the

Marc Caron  1:17:56  
publisher. Definitely share it. Share it out there, far and wide for those interested as well through our community. And you know, it's thank you for your kind words, Chris in it is the, let me just get the marbles out of my mouth. It's not really a conference. We just call it a conference. It's a ceremony, and then we kind of put a conference inside of it, right? So it certainly is, is a community based gathering. And you know, I'm blessed to be here today at the I am awake Foundation. And this is a story about Chris and Jen and the work that they're doing in consciousness, research and exploration. And they met at the Spira plant medicine conference in 2019 and their work grew from there. So they've been doing this beautiful work for five years. We've met so many people who have met and, you know, created relationships. And you know, doing business and working together and just connecting that, that we've seen is a great connecting opportunity, and even if you're not in person, you still have that ability in the virtual world as well, because you have the ability to connect and chat with like minded people. So if you're interested, by all means, please join us. There's many ways to do so, and we'd love to see you there, whether virtually, and of course, in person, there's always room. So that being said, I just want to thank you again, Chris for the work you do. I look forward to seeing you and Christina again in the very near future. And Steven, thank you as well for being my partner and co host and everything that we do together. It's always, always a pleasure. And I also want to give a big shout out to Michael Krause, who is behind the scenes. He's just a beautiful soul who does a lot of great work with unify the world peace movement and many, many different things regarding spirituality of consciousness. There he is, there, Michael, thank you for your support always, as we do these programs so we can I.

Speaker 5  1:20:00  
You can, can? I can't raise my hand because of the technology behind it.

Marc Caron  1:20:06  
Well, you've got, you've got all the power, really, man.

Speaker 5  1:20:12  
And I just wanted to deeply, deeply express my gratitude to you, specifically, Chris, for your wisdom, for your knowledge, and having done the work for all of us, and, and what I really got from you and and, and really feeling into your energy, and you said presence early on, is where you've arrived in that deepest, deepest level of the of the gentleness of your heart. And that, to me, that is what we need to cultivate across the planet if we want to move into that new transformation. And I, I I would want to get emotional almost because I can, I can feel the presence of you and and I, I just deeply one about you, for your work, for your wisdom, for your knowledge and and, and the beauty of your soul and and thank you. Thank you. Thank you. And it What an honor to be supporting this through the technology here in the in the background and and also, thank you, Steve, and thank you, Mark, the beauty that shines through you is and the commitment is is unparalleled. So

Marc Caron  1:21:30  
thank you for that, Michael. And you know, as a segue, hey, Steven, next this Thursday, two days from now, we've got a great series coming up in the in the next month of pre conference events and conversations. This Thursday, four o'clock, Marco Sanchez and acashia Lewis will be joining us,

Stephen Gray  1:21:50  
and they're both absolutely brilliant. They were, in my humble opinion, no offense to any of the other speakers last year, they were the two strongest, and for me personally, they're both brilliant and have a lot of really relevant things to say. And Hey, Michael, if you're still listening, I'm lucky for you, Chris has gone beyond the level of spiritual realization where he's seduced by flattery.

Marc Caron  1:22:19  
And then lastly, hey, next a week from today, Rick Doblin from Matt, and then I think the following Thursday after we have soy, keen,

Stephen Gray  1:22:35  
soy, Ken a Yeah, actually, we have to talk about that

Marc Caron  1:22:38  
the time. Let's just talk about who's joining us next Thursday, and we'll talk about that.

Stephen Gray  1:22:43  
No part of that Mark is we might possibly have to switch that to Wednesday for Anya, but we'll have to talk about it.

Marc Caron  1:22:51  
Okay. Well, next week, stay tuned. We got lots coming. Just check your emails and make sure you confirm that so you get everything. We'll be posting that. We just want to let everybody know. So with that being said, I just want to wrap up with a nice little closing for conscious living on Co Op radio. My name is Mark Kuhn, joined by Steven gray and our special guest Chris Bache here on 100.5 cfro FM in Vancouver, until next time, take care of each other. Thank you,

Speaker 3  1:23:20  
everybody.

Marc Caron  1:23:27  
All right, we are completing.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
