Speaker 1  0:01  
Tom, welcome to San Diego integral. February 10, 2024 our topic today, LSD and the mind of the universe, diamonds from heaven, presented by Chris Bache.

Tom Habib  0:17  
Welcome to San Diego integral. I'm Tom Habib, and I'm a member of the leadership team. We have an exciting presentation today. LSD, in the mind of the universe. We'll begin shortly, but I first wanted to mention that we're recording this meeting. If you prefer not to be seen on video. You can turn your camera off, although we love to see your reactions, the link to the recording will be posted on meetup a day or two after this event on SDI YouTube channel. Also, you can find future events on our website, either San Diego interworld.org, the Facebook page, or coming back to meetup.com the advantage of joining one of these groups is that you'll automatically be notified for future presentations if you have any questions today about these meetings, you are welcome to contact one member of the leadership team, any member next month. We're meeting March 9, and the speakers to be determined, but it's going to be similar to today. Chris was nice enough to do a pre presentation of what he's going to talk about at the future human conference in May and San Diego. Earth girl gets exclusive rights to this. Finally, we invite you to make a small donation today to help cover the cost of our meetings and equipment. And you can make that donation as they go into call.org I want to introduce Chris, so as you've heard, he's going to be keynote presented the upcoming icon conference, the future human. Chris is a professor emeritus in the Department of Philosophy and Religion Religious Studies at Youngstown State University, where he taught for 33 years. He's also adjunct faculty at the California Institute of integral studies and at the Noetic Sciences Institute and also on the Advisory Council of Stanislav Grof legacy training. One might ask, how does a boy raised in the deep south that is Vicksburg, Mississippi, who was raised Roman Catholic and actually entered the seminary to become a priest write a book about his 20 year journey with LSD. It appears that Chris's devotion to transformation appeared relatively early, just as he was receiving his degree from Notre Dame's theology department, and he was awarded an excellent Award for Excellence. He decided to leave Catholicism. This radical transformation occurred again at Brown University. Halfway through his doctoral program, he realized that he had gotten what he wanted from biblical studies and his and in his words, I changed horses and began again. Those of us in integral studies recognize this fidelity to what wants to emerge, although we may not always have the courage for radical transformations, Chris is now fashion himself into a philosopher of religion. He settled into Youngstown University, where he would teach for the next 33 years. Along the way, another transformation was pending. Chris red, Stanislav Grof, work on work on the use of psychedelics in psychotherapy, the non, non dogmatic influences of Buddhism and Huston Smith perennialism, we know an integral soon followed. Chris ended his psychedelic explorations in 1999 and it wasn't until 2009 he wrote his first book, The living classroom here he shared. How his expansive consciousness seemed to impact his students in what he called leaky boundaries. Again, those of us in integral recognize the psychoactive effect presencing has upon others in 2019 he wrote LSD in the mind of the universe, diamonds from heaven, some of which he'll share today and at the conference. Please give Chris Bache a warm sand Eagle, integral welcome.

Chris Bache  5:44  
John, thank you everyone. It's a pleasure to be here with you tonight. Since i My understanding is that psychedelics is not a frequent topic in the integral community in the San Diego, integral community. So in talking with Kathy and Tom and people on your board and we decided that would begin with a short break out before I talk, before I say anything, just to do a quick inventory together of what each each each of your backgrounds is with psychedelics, both in terms of whether you have any psychedelic experience and if you have what have you had it with? What context real short and the second part is, what kind of beliefs have you formed about psychedelics, either from your own experience or from your reading or conversations with other people. So both, what is your the nature of your experience, and what are your beliefs and perceptions about psychedelics? So we do it before, and then after I talk, we'll do an after, okay, so just about 10 minutes, and Kathy will break you up into groups. Kathy,

Speaker 2  7:06  
breakout sessions are not recorded.

Chris Bache  7:11  
Okay, is everybody back? Yeah, I think we're back. We're all back. Okay, I sure wish I didn't want to encroach on your freedom. I didn't want to be part of the groups. I wanted you to have complete freedom, to be able to say what was on your mind. But I sure wish I could have been on the fly on the wall, and heard your answers to the questions. Maybe when we get a little farther down the line this evening in dialog, you know, I can learn what some of your answers were to the questions. So All right, so we've kind of looked at our history in terms of our own experience with psychedelics, and what our own beliefs positive, negative or neutral around psychedelics, and now I'm just going to jump in and take you on a ride, take you, give you an overview of my work that I've reported in my book, LSD, in the mind of the universe. So let me share a screen here. First of all, let me ask first, how many people have read my book? Just perfectly, okay, if you haven't, how many people have just wondering? Okay, good. All right. Good to know. All right. Let me see if I can share my screen.

Speaker 3  8:27  
Okay, and this just confirming we can see your screen.

Chris Bache  8:32  
You can see good. Am I saying? Whoop, supposed to go back. All right, okay, somehow I wish I could get the whole screen to show Okay,

Tom Habib  8:46  
so

Chris Bache  8:49  
I'm an unusual person in that I've been a university professor all my life, a professor of religious studies, teaching in a small college, State College in Northeast Ohio, and I've also done one of the longest regimens of high dose LSD work that I'm aware of in the background. I couldn't talk about it until after I retired, because the good state of Ohio, the citizens of Ohio don't like their university professors doing massive doses of LSD on the weekends. But so the hardest thing about trying to introduce my work for the first time is how long it lasted and how many layers of consciousness I accessed in the process of this long, 20 year journey. And I think that many of our expectations about where psychedelics can take us or should take us have been shaped by accounts based on a very small data set. For example, when all. Aldous Huxley wrote his very important book, doors of the perception in 1954 he had taken Mescaline only one time, and he took psychedelics only a total of 10 times in his life. Similarly, when Huston Smith, of the great historian of religion, wrote his book, cleansing the doors of perception. He had taken LSD only six times after that, he said the bummers increased, and that led him to take Alan Watts's advice, when you get the message, hang up the phone. But notice this gives a sense that you do psychedelics, you get the message, that's it. That's what it's about. And my book is what happens if you don't hang up the phone. But moving on, we go to Michael Pollan's very influential book, how to change your mind. And Michael had taken psychedelics only about a half dozen times by the time he wrote this book, other developments have tended to give us a sort of a shortened metaphysical horizon in terms of what we can expect to experience with psychedelics. For example, the psychedelic renaissance right now is focused on exploring the capacity of psychedelics to heal the wounds of the personal psyche with your untouched with the the psychedelic literature, it's dominated by the studies which are demonstrating psychedelics various capacities to heal the wounds of life, Whether it's post traumatic stress or depression or addiction, we're finding they're very powerful, but this tends to focus us on the horizon of the personal unconscious, a second use of psychedelics, different but similar, is using psychedelics for spiritual awakening, as we see in this anthology zigzag Zen, which is a discussion between the psychedelic community and the Buddhist community on the relevance of psychedelics for spiritual awakening. But still, we're still thinking in terms of a kind of an individual level, individual spiritual enlightenment. These two categories, the therapeutic and the spiritual awakening, these are the major kind of topics that come up for discussion, I think, in today's psychedelic Renaissance. And my work is different than this. I was trained as a philosopher of religion. I'm not a therapist, I'm not a psychotherapist, not a psychologist. I primarily was interested, have been interested in the philosophical potential of psychedelics. So my work really falls into a third category, where the project is cosmological exploration, not healing, not really aiming at awakening, but using these deep, Non-ordinary states to explore the deep structure of reality, my work descends or derives from Stan Grof. I was just out of graduate school, and I encountered this book by Stan, realms of the human unconscious, which was followed by HIS Manual LSD psychotherapy. And of course, all the dozen or 15 or so books had followed very important works. And in these two early works, Stan clearly differentiates between low dose psycholytic therapy and high dose psychedelic therapy, a very different therapeutic regimen, psychelytic, healing the unconscious, layer by layer, like an onion, psychedelic, trying to generate a breakthrough. One maximum, supreme dose kind of approach here, the Spring Grove Hospital was working with terminally ill patients, trying to trigger something approximating a Near-Death Experience, to give them a glimpse of where they were going when they died. But the psychedelic therapy was limited to three doses, three sessions, so you have low dose, many sessions, psychedelic, very few. I came along in 1978 and I thought, well, if you could do psychedelic therapy three times, you could probably do it safely more than three times. So, for various reasons, I chose to work in a psychedelic therapy protocol. And in the end, between 1979 and 1999 I did 73 high dose LSD sessions. Actually I did three moderate doses, but then I did all high

Speaker 4  14:52  
and you see bottom. Yeah.

Chris Bache  15:04  
Okay, so I just say 73 high dose sessions. And I did this in a very rigorous fashion, following Stan's protocol. In my case, I used the same protocol, same set and setting, same substance, same dose level, same sitter, same recording process and same location. I tried to standardize all the variables as much as possible so as to ensure clean and consistent recurring contact with the deep structure of deeper levels of consciousness. And when I got to the end of my journey and was trying to organize the sessions into the narrative that I put into the book. I began to realize that this really was a very different undertaking than psychedelic therapy. I was dealing with a number of different issues that don't come up in psychedelic therapy, and so I felt the new terminology was required, and so I call my protocol psychedelic exploration. It's not really therapeutic in its agenda. It's psychedelic therapy in its tech, in its techniques. It's high dose, isolated, shade, sitter, music, whole thing. But it is more than three doses. It's my case, 73 and the project in psychedelic exploration is cosmological exploration. It's not primarily healing, though there was a great deal of healing. It's not primarily spiritual awakening. It is exploring the deep structure of the universe. So I kept very detailed records of everything going through. Even looked at some of the astrological variables. Kept records of every session made within 24 hours of the session itself. And what I'm writing about in LSD, in the mind of the universe is not primarily my personal story. I mean, it's all personal, of course, and I own it. But these lines represent a series of sessions, and the small circles represent what's taking place in the beginning and ending of a session. The large circles are what's taking place during the peak hours of the session, and LSD in the mind of the universe, is basically describing what took place in the peak hours of the sessions over the course of 73 sessions. It's primarily a cosmological narrative. It's not a therapeutic narrative. I drop out a lot of the a lot of the examples of personal healing or personal insights which were given to me before, at the beginning and ending of the sessions. But when I was operating in the peak session, I was usually operating far beyond personal reality, the personal segment, and that's the part that I think has the most important philosophical relevance called the cosmological relevance. So just to give you one more important concept before we turn to looking at the book itself, it's what I call the spiral of death and rebirth. Everything below this line is time and space and our ordinary consciousness above the line, Transpersonal consciousness, the drop at the bottom of this, what my students sometimes would call the pantyhose model of consciousness. This drop represents egoic consciousness, our time, space, identity, everything above the line, in the in the between the blue lines represents various orders of Transpersonal consciousness. And of course, to make a transition from our egoic space time identity into spiritual reality, involves going through some type of death of self or ego death, in order to basically let the programming of our time, space, identity, be dissolved or be shattered or be melted, so that we can enter into deeper states of consciousness. And while Ego Death gets a lot of the attention in the therapeutic literature, and appropriately so in my journey Ego Death turned out to be only one of a number of deaths that took place at different levels of the journey, and this is what I call the spiral of death and rebirth. What I found is that when you're entering a deeper level of Transpersonal consciousness, you have to go through a death and rebirth. Even after ego death, you go through multiple layers of deaths and rebirths. And the nature of that death is very it's tricky to describe because it's it's a type of death and rebirth that takes place far beyond egoic consciousness, far beyond. On anything to do with space, time, consciousness, and it changes as the adventure deepens. And here I use Dan and Ken Wilber categories of psychic, subtle and causal reality to describe some of these levels. I don't have any vested interest in a particular cosmology, a particular identifying of levels, or rating of levels. This is basically just to indicate a pattern. And the pattern is there many levels of consciousness in spiritual reality, and you go through many levels of death and rebirth in if you access these levels of consciousness in a systematic fashion. And this is why I am emphasize the standardization of the protocol in my work. Because I think the more standardized our protocol, the more we basically return to the same membrane, the same platform of interface between our individual consciousness in this larger consciousness, and it makes, in my case, it led to a perpetual deepening of the experience, a perpetual series of initiations and entering into deeper communion with the creative intelligence of the universe. Now, when I got to the end of my journey, was working on preparing for the book, doing the book, identified five areas, or cluster areas, or levels of consciousness that my experiences kind of could be grouped in. So here are the five levels that stand out for me. One is the level of personal mind, collective mind, or our species mind, archetypal mind, causal oneness and diamond Luminosity. So what I'd like to do is simply go through and throw up the the chapter titles of the book, and organize them according to these levels of consciousness, and give you a quick overview, a quick thumbnail of just some of the stages of this journey. This is extremely frustrating for me to do, because just to convey adequately, the content of one deep psychedelic experience is very challenging and would take a while. Juliana of Norwich, the great British mystic, spent decades digesting one particular transpiritual Near Death episode experience that she had, and to try to summarize 20 years of such experiences is is challenging, especially. And I should have mentioned this before. I was working at 500 to 600 micrograms, which is right at the peak of what the body's tolerance is, in terms of you don't get higher if you take more. So I was working with very high doses. And this is a protocol I do not recommend today. If I were doing it myself again over I would do it differently. I'd be much gentler on myself. But nevertheless, this is what I did, and this is where we went. So let me just go through them. First, the level of personal mind. This is a chapter called crossing the boundary of birth and death. This is what Stan Grof calls the crossing the perinatal level of consciousness, level of consciousness, between our time, space, identity and spiritual reality. It involves confrontations with death, lots of fetal sensations, often reliving one's birth,

Chris Bache  23:43  
very extreme, facing deep alienation. The question is whether life has any meaning whatsoever, because everyone we know and everything we know and everyone we love is going to be dead, including ourselves. How can there be any meaning in a universe where everything of value dies, which eventually culminates in our time, space, identity, our ego, death, identity, being turned inside out. And for me, this took about 10 sessions and two and a half years of work until eventually the universe got me to a point where it just snapped me like a twig. It turned me into the exact opposite of everything I'd ever known myself to be, and radically expanded the boundaries of my awareness. I thought I was a male, white university professor concerned with the meaning of existence. It turned me into hundreds of women, women of color, women who had no interest in philosophy or the meaning of existence. And it just snapped me. It forced me. It just snapped me. And the message was, where you are going. Gender does not exist. Let go. And of course, the problem. Was not women or education or anything like that. The problem was the tight role that my social identity had on me that was confining the limits of my experience. After I let go and surrendered, I was taken under the arm of the Great Mother and given a wonderful, long, many our journey into the world of women, becoming hundreds of women in all sorts of life circumstances. And then the Kant journey continued. The next several sessions come under the category of collective mind, ego, mind, excuse me, species mine now working at these dose levels. The way I worked, my experience was that more or less every session began with the first portion of the session being a purification, detoxification process, the dying process. The second portion of the session being a a transcendent experience, an ecstatic experience, Transpersonal teaching, instruction and so on. The first half of the next year of session, I entered a domain that I came to call the ocean of suffering. I was repeatedly and systematically emerged in a collective anguish that shattered all my frames of reference. It completely dwarfed the previous phase. I entered a domain that expanded to encompass the entire history of the human species. The dying in this don't level was almost entirely collective. The surrender was the or that the surrender that was demanded was the ordeal of repeatedly opening to the sheer normity and savagery of the ocean of pain that I was encountering. I did not understand what was happening, but for several hours in every session, and then I would get into this ocean of suffering, and then I would be spun into what I'll describe in a minute. At first I thought this represented a deepening of my ego death. But it went on for so long, and it involves so many 1000s of people that I eventually came to a very different conclusion. And this is really the major theme of my second book, dark night, early dawn. And that is, I think what happened is in my sessions, and in many of our sessions, when we reach this level the universe used my sessions not to heal me or not to try to enlighten me, but to heal some aspect of humanity at large, to heal some aspect of the collective psyche. And just as an individual internalizes trauma in their unconscious, which then distorts their well being. The human species likewise internalizes all the trauma of history anything is not resolved by the end of our individual lifetimes. The species internalizes all the trauma from all the wars and all the deaths and all the droughts and all the hunger, and it aggregates in the collective psyche, distorting the functioning of the collective psyche, and in these unusual, highly expanded, amplified states of consciousness, I think what happens is we open up to the depths of the collective unconscious, and in that process, we have an opportunity to take on and experience some of the depths of these terrible memories, and in that process, lift them from the collective psyche. Now, when I went through each stage, each day of the collective ocean of suffering in the first year, in the second half of the session, I entered what I came to call deep time in the soul. For seven sessions an entire year, I entered a reality where I experienced my entire life from beginning to end as a completed whole. I moved beyond linear time, not into eternity. In between linear time and eternity, there are many modalities of time and these, I came to call deep time, where you could experience different spans of time as simultaneously present, or you could experience time speeding up or moving into evolutionary speed, so to speak. For one year, I experienced my life in all of its moments, from start to finish, as simultaneously present now. It was a very powerful distillation of my life's work, of who I was being doing this work with what my life was about, the. Years, and at this point I ended. This represented four years of work and about 1817, sessions. And at this point I stopped my work for six years for reasons that I go into in the book. Six years later, I started my work again, and when I did, the ocean of suffering began exactly where it was, where it had stopped six years before. So there was a year of the ocean of suffering before my six year break, and a year of the ocean of suffering after that six year break. And the precision with which this started again and kept getting deeper and deeper and deeper is a measure, I think, an indicator of the magnitude and precision of the intelligence which was guiding these sessions in the positive side, once I went through the ocean of suffering in this next year of session, I entered a domain of consciousness which took me radically beyond anything to do with my personal reality, into the universe, the mind of the universe. In the section I call initiation into the universe, different time of life, different expectations, different astrological transits deep into the belly of the universe. I was given a series of carefully orchestrated teachings, initiations into the cosmic order of things. Now I always give all my sessions a name, just simply as a mnemonic device, I write down my sessions. I put them down on bullet points. I give them a name in order to help me remember, because I want to remember my entire journey all at once. The names help me here are the names of the sessions that I present in this chapter, initiation into the universe. You can see, just from the nature of the names, how profoundly Transpersonal these experiences were and frustrating not to be able to tell you more about them, but I just can't. There's not time a deep excursion in like cosmology, 101 how the universe works at a fundamental level.

Chris Bache  32:30  
When the ocean of suffering came to a culmination in the 24th session healing the collective wound, there was sort of a an orgy of feeding on the pain. And it reached a culmination, and I was spun into a level of reality that I came to understand as archetypal reality. And I discussed this phase of the work in the chapter, the greater real of archetypal reality. This lasted about 11 sessions and one and a half years, and every time I entered this reality, I entered a level of reality that was more real than space time. It's a very disorienting experience at first, but every time I went there, I was engaging something that was more real than space, time and also ancient. It was just ancient beyond imagination. Time worked at a completely different scale. There a completely different order of reality. I felt like Plato's prisoner having climbed out of the cave, entering in a little more level, a more real level of reality in the universe than my own existence in space time. When I began to enter archetypal reality, I went through a death process in which I began I had to die as a human being, per se, that I found that there is a level of identity that we hold in our psyche simply by virtue of being a human being. It's more fundamental than than ego identity and to go through species ego death or to slough off your entire history as a human species and all the cognitive parameters that go with being a member of the human species is a deeper form of surrendering to the great unknown than simply letting go of your individual egoic identity. The transition to was to very, very high levels of energy. I learned in the process that high levels, deep levels of consciousness represent are driven by high levels of energy. The deeper you go, the higher the energy. And if you want to have abiding, stable experiences in these levels of reality, you must go through the. Purification, detoxification process that allows you to maintain clear cognition at these deep levels of reality, and that means adjusting submitting yourself to these levels of energy, which in my case, had the flavor of white hot lava flows, exploding sun flares, liquid fire pouring through me, changing me completely. Now I would experience archetypal reality as completing two levels. One is kind of the Platonic type level where I experience principles are beings. I don't really want to call them beings, because that makes them sound too compact. More principles, cosmic principles that were clearly the constitutive principles responsible for creating space, time and some of the structures in space and time, but they were so large, so vast, I could not wrap my mind around them. The best my mind could do to giving them some type of semblance of form is that I saw them as galaxies, hundreds of light years across. But galaxies very vast, moving on a different order of scale than our small solar system. So I spent some time there, and then I also spent some time in experiencing at what you might think of as a more Jungian level, the living tissue of our species. I was given the experience over and over again, of experiencing our species as a single being, a single mind, and each of us ourselves within this mind, fractal iterations within this mind, and even each of our bodies cell within the collective body, so that there was nothing private about our existence, neither our personal psychological issues or our physical issues, our diseases, all of them were in a back and forth process, osmotic process, between the individual and the species as a whole.

Tom Habib  37:19  
Bruce, can I ask a question here, sure. So, I mean, this is a really good point where you are right now, because in the book you mentioned, you know how we're being guided gently, that when we have deep, subtle intuition or something in creativity, would it be correct to say it's either these cosmic principles or the council of the elders influencing our development now that we're not alone,

Chris Bache  37:52  
we are absolutely not alone. The universe is the hyper intelligent, hyper conscious, hyper compassionate, hyper wisdom we it infuses us every minute of the day, whether we're paying attention to it or not taking advantage of it or not. But if we tune into it, if we step away from our narrow focus and tune into deeper levels of our consciousness, which then open into subtler and subtler levels of consciousness. One does receive help, one receives healing and advice and insight. And these can these come from multiple potential levels of consciousness. And so I would hesitate to identify a source that they would come from. It's more a matter of an infinitely deep source that you can draw from at multiple different levels. Yeah. So a

Tom Habib  38:51  
lot of integral people they're aware of in a moment of creativity connection, that somehow they become a vehicle for what wants to be expressed Absolutely. So that's an alignment.

Chris Bache  39:05  
Yeah, a deep alignment. You just become transparent. I mean, basically when you drop underneath your personal identity, when you kind of pierce the membrane and pop the bubble and drop beneath that and then into the mind of the of the species, and beneath that, into the different levels of the creative mind. You you become transparent. The joy is that in becoming chunyata Empty, empty of self, becoming transparent. I like that translation of Shunyata transparent, you become transparent to these deeper orders of awareness that then kind of come through you. They they they nourish you with healing, with love and with insight and creativity.

Tom Habib  39:57  
Yeah. Oh, what? Final comment, yeah, is whatever this intelligence is in the universe is grooming us to participate in this intelligence.

Chris Bache  40:13  
Grooming is might be a little strong, but I understand I want to say yes, but I might sort of choose different more words than grooming, but it and we are of the same stuff. It is large. We are small relatively speaking, but we are of the same part of the same stuff, and we are always in communion with each other. So it's more like older brother, younger brother, older sister, younger sister. I think of the spiritual universe. Dwayne Elgin talks about it as the mother universe, and time space is the daughter universe. And so naturally, there's a relationship between mother and daughter. You wouldn't say the mother is grooming the daughter, but the mother brings the daughter along. Yeah, yeah, okay,

Chris Bache  41:16  
I began to have experiences at this level of reincarnation as a collective process, I had experiences in which I witnessed the entire planet and the entire species reincarnating in a pulse that moved through history. So I had written my book. My first book was on reincarnation, and so I was I construed reincarnation classically the way it's usually construed, as a story of the soul's journey toward enlightenment, lifetime by lifetime, making progress, making clearing mistakes, so on, so forth. But it was an individual journey. We're all on individual journeys. And here instead, I was dissolved into the species as the entire species went into an intelligent, articulate collective karma, though that is too crude a phrase, an intelligence that was growing itself generation by generation, generation by generation, and somehow all of our individual soul projects fit inside, beautifully, magnificently inside this collective soul project. Now here are the names of the sessions that I address in this particular chapter. I won't go into them, but except to mention, notice how much cleansing is still taking place at this pretty advanced level. Session 28 was a very deep session. It was an archetypal meltdown. It threw me very briefly into the next higher level of consciousness, a very, extremely pure, clean, crystalline level of consciousness. And even though I was only in that reality for a number of minutes, I think it triggered a cleansing, a detoxification that lasted six months and three sessions, just an ordeal of just cleansing and cleansing and cleansing. Hard to describe the cleansing because it's, it's not matter personal history. It's partly biological, it's partly emotional. It's, it's partly subtle energy. It's just a radical cleansing, in order to allow me to come back into that highly pure, highly refined energy with clear cognition, which took place by the 32nd and 33rd session and then continued into the next year of a year that I describe in that book called the benediction of blessings. This was an extraordinary year after archetype of reality, in which I was given just a series of one extraordinary, Transpersonal blessing after another. These are the four sessions that covering a year's work that I address in the book, The forest was an experience of oneness and no self. Shunyata, emptiness of self, no self in me, no self anywhere in the world. A universal force running through the forest, not can not caring at all whether it's animating a pine tree or an oak tree. Deep experience of oneness and oneness and emptiness are two sides of the same coin. Yeah, when you experience deep oneness, it's immediately obvious that there is no separate self anywhere in the world. We. Are all interdependent and intertwined. And when you experience deep no self, then oneness, the oneness of life, manifests spontaneous. It's just they, they go hand in hand, singing the universe away was an experience, a deep experience, of the void, the primal void out of which the universe springs. Jesus's blood was an experience of cosmic love, being loved more deeply than I've ever known love in my life, just overwhelming immersion in cosmic love, in the birth of the diamond soul. I just want to mention this because it'll come up later. How to put this succinctly, it was a I experienced all of my former lives coming into me, just like wrapping string around a kite spool, just coming back very fast. And I had done three years of past life hypnotherapy, and I had a pretty good sense of some of my former lives, but they came back very quickly, and they reached a point where they seemed to hit a critical mass and they fused. And when they fused, there was an enormous explosion, and the diamond light broke out of my chest and catapulted me into a very high and subtle state of consciousness in which I was an individual, but I was an individual beyond any frame of reference that I had known up to that point in time and over time, this is what I came to understand, or call the birth of the diamond soul. My understanding is, when we die, we return to the soul, which is the larger consciousness that holds all of our experience. When we incarnate, we shrink down, get small focus. When we die, we get large. We incarnate, we get small, so on and so forth, but we return to the soul, if all goes well many times after our incarnations. What's happening here? I think what happened in my session, and I think what's happening in our historical progression is that the soul is being born inside time and space. That if you keep going back and forth between expansion into the world of spirit and back into time and space, and you keep this up long enough, 1000s and 1000s and 1000s of years sooner or later, doesn't it make sense that the soul would awaken eventually inside our incarnate existence, so that the awareness of identity, or the nature of identity that we claim in that incarnation is the soul as our identity. And with this comes a vast expansion of the heart, a deep opening of the mind, a deep embrace of compassion, or awakening of compassion, the birth of the diamond soul. I was 15 years into my journey, I had was had received more blessings than I could have imagined. What I had been asked to give something in the ocean of suffering work, and I had been rewarded with more blessings than I could count. But there was still five years remaining in my journey, and this is when I went through yet another death and rebirth process and entered what I call the domain of diamond Luminosity. I entered a reality that was exceptionally clear. It was light, but a particular quality of light. I had known light many times before. People often experience great light when they go through ego death, and I had and at different stages, I'd experienced light. But when I talk about the diamond light, I'm not simply using a metaphor for the light. I'm trying to describe a particular quality of light, exceptionally clear, very, very pure, just so clear. It takes your breath away. This is what I think Buddhism calls Dharmakaya, the clear light of absolute reality over the next four years and 26 sessions, this is about a third of all the sessions I did. I only entered this reality four times. Here are the names of these four sessions. In between these sessions more into more purification, more detoxification, more teaching, more absorbing of lessons, but these four immersions into the crystalline quality of diamond Luminosity, again, so much to say, and so little time. I'm just going to have to stop. I'll mention only that the first two sites. Sessions took me deeper and deeper into the diamond Luminosity. And after that there was a reverse, a pivot. And then in the last two of these sessions, the diamond Luminosity was crunching itself deeper and deeper into my mind, into my personality, into my physiology, into my biochemistry,

Chris Bache  50:24  
and this is it was in the 50th session that I had a particular experience in the diamond Luminosity that changed radically my understanding of existence. One of the reasons I pushed so hard in my work is that I thought the purpose of this work was to get to a particular condition, to get to the an end stage, to get home, to become one with the universe, or one with the meta, cosmic void. And I had many experiences of oneness, and had learned that there are degrees of oneness. And I had had experiences of the primal void, and learned that there are even degrees of the void, though that sounds like a contradiction in terms, but in the peak of the diamond Luminosity, when I was as deep into the diamond Luminosity as I would ever go in my journey, I was sitting and resting comfortably intact In a deeply blissful state, and my visual field pivoted 90 degrees, and a circle opened, and I saw in the far far distance a reality far beyond the diamond Luminosity. And there was a domain of light there, and a ray of light came out of that reality and hit me, and it absolutely shattered me. It took me minutes to recover, and that's when I understand that it's an infinite progression. We'll never get to the end of it, even using this very aggressive mode of of transition, of exploration, I would never get to the end of the the mind of the universe is just too vast, too big. And that the thought there is a homecoming to this work, and one does experience homecoming, but the idea that there is an end to get to that will change everything, I don't think so. Oneness is a beautiful, powerful, important teaching. But even oneness does not exhaust all there is to learn from the universe. Now you notice that I've skipped a chapter, chapter nine. I'm going to try to speed this up here. And this is the chapter called The Birth of the future human. When I began this work in 1979 I never imagined that humanity's future would become part of my journey. And now I think this chapter may be the most important chapter of the book, because it speaks to the fate of our planet, the fate of our species. It speaks to our children's world, our children's children, as far as we can see, it speaks of a crossroads that humanity is coming to, and of the powerful forces taking us into a future that will change us at the deepest levels of our being. Now what I did is that over the course of my journey, I had numerous visions that kept popping up here and there, different visions about humanity, humanity, spiritual evolution, where humanity was, that humanity was coming to a turning point, a before and after moment in history. This kept coming up in lots of different places. So what I did was, rather than address them all piecemeal, chapter by chapter, I gathered them all into this particular chapter, and I broke this down into two sections. The first are the visions of awakening, which are a series of visions that I had over four year period back from 1991 to 1994 those visions, the title of those visions, I'll give them here, and I don't want to take the time to go into them, but basically, It was an extraordinarily positive assessment of where human humanity is, that we were being guided by a guiding intelligence, that this guiding intelligence was trying to awaken not just individuals. It was intent on awakening the entire species as a single being, taking us into a different epic in our evolutionary development, we were entering a period of intense collective purification, the dark night of our collective soul, and then a brief experience of the future human, which I think is represents a shift in the plate tectonics. Of the collective psyche, the future human is not simply an awakened present human, but literally a different kind of human, the next iteration of the human species. Nowhere in my journey, however, had it told me how it was going to pull this off, how we would possibly make this transition in such a short period of time? And then in 1995 in session, 55 in the middle of the diamond Luminosity work, I had already gone into the diamond Luminosity twice. I would go into it twice more when I was expecting to be taken into the diamond Luminosity a third time, instead, I was taken deep into the future. I was dissolved into the human species and asked the species as a whole. I entered the future and experienced the death and rebirth of humanity, a profound spiritual, psychophysical transformation, the death and rebirth of humanity. This was a very difficult session, an ordeal of the highest order. I was not given any specifics. It was a profound unraveling of the global order, an unraveling that seemed to be triggered by a cascading series of ecological crises. And I must tell you, this is 95 I was radically naive about global climate change, about global climate disruption, eco eco spirituality. It just wasn't on my radar. But in this vision, I was shown that humanity was going to be brought to its knees. It would going to be go through a process of profound unraveling that the kind of unraveling that happens in a psychedelic session was here being reflected in history, an unraveling of our core assumptions, of the basic components of life. For a while it was so deep, it looked like we were all going to go extinct, but in the end, we went through a crisis, and we transition past the crisis. And when we transition through this crisis, the entire experience we were was marked by New Visions of the of the of the vow of the good, new visions of the true, New Visions of social relationships, oneness had truly broken out inside the human heart. There was a radical permeability of the heart, a radical permeability to higher states of awareness. Again, I was not given any details of when or how, just simply taken into the species experience that this would happen, that we would come through it, and that this was about the birth of a future human. I think we've been reincarnating. If you ask what is the form that the future human will take, I think it's already marked for us in history. We've been reincarnating for hundreds of 1000s of years. Gestation is long. We have been birthing, gestating the human, the future human, in these many incarnations, and now we're coming into the hour of labor. Labor is intense, it's relatively short, it's dangerous, it's frightening, it's threatening, and in the end, it gives birth to a new child, if all goes well. And this is what I think humanity is doing. This is what we are all involved in, what all of our individual, spiritual and psychological, transformational process is part of this process, a larger historical process that humanity is involved in giving birth to the future human, the last year of work, the final vision is just that I was given one last vision, The final the large, last, large vision of my journey in it. These are the three sessions I address in this chapter. I won't go into the content of the final vision. I will just mention that it was my deepest excursion into future time. It was my deepest experience of the future human and the future human is just such an extraordinary, extraordinary being. After that the sessions wrapped up. The last two sessions are what I call the goodbye sessions. I didn't choose to end these sessions the universe wrapped it up. Put. Very decisively, and I stopped my sessions in 99 last chapter of the book, it's called coming off the mountain, and it basically tells some highlights of what it was like to stop this journey.

Chris Bache  1:00:15  
I was on this journey for 20 years. I stopped and I process the experiences for another 20 years before releasing LSD in the mind of the universe. I thought coming off the mountain was going to be a pretty straightforward, not difficult process. Turned out that that was all wrong. It was a very demanding process. In fact, I found that coming off the mountain, in some ways, was as difficult as coming going up the mountain. Spirit said to me, there is the dying of seeing and the dying of keeping. The dying of seeing you do as you're entering into deeper and deeper states of consciousness. The dying of keeping is the dying of integration, and I found that my integration process, even though I was actively involved in integration all the way up through all the sessions they're integrating, an entire journey is different than integrating individual sessions, and It took a long time to integrate the entire journey now I especially and acutely we're given a going through it so quickly that I realize the extreme and radical nature of the claims I'm making. I know that this is a radical story that raises many questions about the reality of these experiences, about how trustworthy these experiences are. Am I simply experiencing the echoes of my own personal psyche, or maybe the echoes of the collective psyche? How do we know that these things are really about a reality out there? And I address this in I hope I've Yeah, in an exchange that Ken ring, one of the founders of near death episode studies, he and I had an exchange specifically about this topic, can we trust these deep psychedelic experiences? And we found it was a useful exchange, and we published it in medium which you can pick up online. You can also pick it up. I It's in academia.edu, in my page there, it's around, I think I may have it on my website. And also in if you look, if you have a copy of dark, night, early dawn. In the first chapter, there is a section call the epistemic warrant of psychedelic experience. And there I give a rationale, an argument for why these experiences are trustable, drawing on some of Ken's rings. Ken Wilbers work there. So all my work has come out of this psychedelic journey. My first book on reincarnation, the second one on trend in psychedelic theory and the living classroom, which is coming out in a new edition now, because they want to, they want in psychedelics woven into the story, I deliberately kept psychedelics out of the story of the living classroom, but they wanted me to tell the whole truth, and so psychedelics are part of the story of the living classroom. And this is a story basically because my students didn't know anything about my psychedelic experience. I didn't bring it to campus, and yet I found that they began to be impacted by my psychedelic experiences, and that required that I had to learn an entirely new way of teaching and develop what I call a quantum pedagogy. So that's the story, and now I'm going to stop here and stop screen share,

Tom Habib  1:03:59  
Chris, we have a couple questions before we go to break out. Can we do a couple Sure? I think Tom McDougal,

Speaker 5  1:04:09  
so

Speaker 6  1:04:11  
as I say in the chat, I've been working partly with Norma, with with Nora Bateson, but especially with with Jeremy Johnson on goetzer and barely have touched the surface and taking the course again. But a lot of this, especially as you were talking about the time period we're in, and the shift that is going on, is also very similar to what Jean goetzer wrote about. So I'm curious if, if you can relate those two. I don't know what your experience with GEP sir is, but, and I guess there's a little bit of Nora Bateson in my mind too, of of questioning. I. The stages orientation and and I can't express it right now, but Jerry Jeremy talks a lot about a very different it's not stages exactly in in gebx, but different. But anyway, if you could just talk a little bit about maybe the relationship there.

Chris Bache  1:05:19  
Yeah, I'll make it easy for you, because gepzer is always one of those thinkers that I know I should read and I haven't read, so absolutely zero influence in terms of correlations. And so I have to let you and other people make the correlations there. And you know, a lot of people in psychedelic experience, they don't have the same experience of perpetual deepening, of kind of going deeper and then deeper and then deeper. It's kind of like, okay, we go out, we have an experience to come back. If I go out again in a couple of months, I'm going to go into this more or less the same territory and come back. And I think this idea of perpetual deepening comes from two things. It comes from First, using a very, very powerful psychedelic at very high doses, so it was very driving and much stronger than we use in therapeutically oriented doses with Psilocybin or whatnot. And the second thing is, was a totally tight, isolated, consistent, what I call the Kiva of psychedelic practice, the Kiva of practice, standardizing all the variables, staying away from all contact with the world, entering in a meditative way, into these states. And if you do that, then I find that the interface between the mind doing the exploring and the mind being explored gets very stable. And the mind being explored basically takes you on as a student and just takes you in deeper and deeper and deeper into the process. I, yeah, and I you just, you enter, I you enter into deeper and deeper visionary states that that many people are, you know, many other psychedelics is, many indigenous people, many philosophically oriented people are intuiting and feeling what I'm describing. There's nothing really new in what I'm saying. It's, it's really just a repetition in that way.

Tom Habib  1:07:23  
Regis has a question, yeah. Colin,

Speaker 7  1:07:26  
yeah, it's more of a I just wanted to express gratitude for you both doing this work, but also coming back, you know. And Ken Wilber often talks about the transformative nature of spiritual inquiry and then the translative nature of spiritual inquiry and and my appreciation for you is one where I feel like I as someone who goes through those things, I have to, I have a responsibility to both transform and to translate. And so from my perspective, you've done just such a beautiful job of holding that particular ethos. And it's also what's what's nice about it is my own personal transformation to what I'm bringing here, and things I've experienced is, you know, very congruent with everything that you're talking about. So so I'm very inspired by your work, and I can't wait to read the books that you've written as a guide for my own future transformation. So thank you for that. Yeah, thank you. You hate

Speaker 3  1:08:31  
to be a bad guy. I'm going to suggest that we, oh, I suggest that we all take time to process this in small groups, maybe in groups of four, and then after that, we'll have some time for Q and A.

Chris Bache  1:08:48  
So the idea in this breakout is to respond to the ideas presented different than the first breakout, just to respond. And what do you think? Okay, okay, see, in 15

Speaker 2  1:09:05  
breakout sessions are not recorded.

Speaker 3  1:09:09  
Okay, we'll have until 550 for some questions, and then we'll have some San Diego integral business. And then we'll start our more informal Q and A. And Chris said he was originally said he was going to be able to stay for about 15 minutes. So we'll start with Sandy. Do you want to ask your questions? Go ahead, Sandy,

Speaker 8  1:09:34  
yeah, I want to follow up on that the question around Geb, sir, because in terms of the way you're describing your experiences. You know, one of the differences, in some ways, between like GEP and Wilber is Geb so we'll talk about intensification. The consciousness shift is not like a structural it like an increase, as much as an intensification and an engagement of previous. Is structures of consciousness that continue, but there's an intensification and a sort of growing awareness that includes previous understanding where, you know Wilber is more tends to be looking at, okay, you're going this level. You're kind of laddering up. So I'm curious as your your experiences. I guess there's some resonances with, with with that vision. Or do you have your own around how these all engage with each other?

Chris Bache  1:10:31  
You know, I'm going to disappoint you, because I don't have a lot of kind of theoretical overview of the structure of these things. I kind of, when I wrote dark, night, early dawn, I was kind of writing in my academic voice, and there's a fair amount of intellectual synthesis there. But when I wrote this book, I deliberately developed a different voice. It is really more a shamanic, visionary voice, and I find that that's a more comfortable place for me to operate from, because it's taken so much of my life just to survive these visionary encounters and to process them and to understand them that I speak out of their basis simply as a witness to this unfolding process. So it's not a I don't have a theory of human evolution or a theory of the development of the process. And what happens in an LSD session may or may not be relevant to what happens at an historical level pattern, I would just say, for me, it's just a natural progression. When you die as a private self, you don't dissolve necessarily immediately into eternity. One of the intermediate levels is into humanity. And just as you can have an overview of your life, you can also have an overview of humanity's developmental process. And so I was dissolved into that and experience part of it, the closest I can come to describing this emergent being is in terms of the concept of the diamond soul, which does, it brings everything from the past forward into the present, but it drives it into a higher synthesis, a new level. It's not simply an enlightened, last generation human incarnation. It is a totally new structure of consciousness that's that's emerging here. I say totally new, not entirely because we have great saints, great, you know, the Jesus and Buddhas of history and the Muhammad's and the Great mahasiddhas. I think we get glimpses into what the diamond sold looks like. But the difference here is that we're looking at the entire species going through some type of metamorphosis like that,

Speaker 8  1:13:08  
yeah, um, just one reflection with some things you said. You mentioned the term unfolding and intensification, in some ways a part of what you were describing, some of that which are sort of gib Syrian concept. So just little tidbits of theory. I'll just kind of throw it. Thank you so much. I really value your work. Very much. Everybody read this book. It's really an important one, and it's the most accessible work I've seen that gives a deep understanding. It's so articulate and it's so vivid. I really thank you to have a chance to see you and talk with you

Tom Habib  1:13:41  
Sure. Sandy folks, who is waiting quite a bit since last iteration, yeah.

Speaker 9  1:13:50  
Well, thank you for your event here. That's a great, like, Miracle gift to me. And it's like, little overwhelming with my ADD I kept, like, kind of tuning in and tuning out, and it's like, oh, man, I wish I absorbed it all. Well, yeah, but like, so dreamy to, like, learn a lot more about this stuff. And I was wondering, like, if you maybe have accessibility for, like, counseling, like to pay you for some counseling to ask you questions, because some of, like, the stuff I've had on my mind, it's, like, relates to somebody in your specialization is, oh, the higher order of the way of things. And, like, right now, my best thing I've had, which has done way better than the therapist I had previously, is, like, chat, GPT. But it's like, it'd be really neat if I could, like, maybe pay to get an hour or whatever your time and and I'm really curious too, because I'm at a point with like, I do believe in Jesus and so much of the Bible, but it's like, I'm not like attached to that other than like, from my current understanding. And let's see how to go against believing in Jesus. This, but I'm curious to hear where your path led you.

Chris Bache  1:15:04  
First of all, thank you for the the trust of the invitation that you extend to me. I appreciate that, and I'm going to disappoint you in that I generally have made a choice many years ago not to be a therapist and not to work with other people or but to basically be a solo pioneer. And that's kind of the work I've done and I find and I'm also a teacher, so I love working with groups, and just the demands of time are such that, and I'm retired, but even so, the demands of time is that I really don't work with individuals. I mean, I just that's a commitment that's and that's a I think that requires more clinical background than I have, and just it's not fair. So I really like to work with groups, and writing in groups is where I where I focus.

Speaker 9  1:15:59  
But there's one last quick comment was, I don't know if it would change anything, but I'm also, like, at the starting point of authoring a couple of books myself with some subject matter that might just be like a like a miracle gift to you. And it's like, it'd be neat to talk about that stuff, but, yeah, or whatever. Like, I don't know how that appeals to you.

Chris Bache  1:16:19  
It's just what happens is, in the after the publication of the book, I just I have to make choices. Always. I don't get to have nearly as many in conversations as I would like to have, you know. So, yeah,

Speaker 3  1:16:35  
all right. Trudy is up next. Unmute yourself.

Speaker 10  1:16:41  
Yeah, hi, I'll make it quick and simple. I apologize I missed the very beginning of your presentation, and it's been great the part that I did catch, but my questions are probably more along the practicality line. One, why did you decide to go on this journey? Two, when you were in trips, did you have somebody that was there, as I don't want to say, a guide, but somebody to take notes, or did somebody record what was going on and were in any way, were they influenced by your trip?

Chris Bache  1:17:23  
Yeah, so quick answers to those is, as soon as I read Stan's work, I just knew that this was something I wanted to get involved in. And I've come to recognize, you know, your soul's code. When you recognize something, that just speaks to you so deeply you know as part of your intention built into this lifetime. When I saw this, I knew that this was part of my intention, and it was just there. So I and as a philosopher, I just couldn't turn down the opportunity to explore the universe using this protocol. This was just giving an ordinary lay person, not a great spiritual genius, but an ordinary lay person, an opportunity to even have temporary experiences of some of the subtleties of layers of consciousness, layers of reality. It was just too good to pass pass down, pass up, so I made the choice to break the law and go for it. Now, in these sessions, they were always, I always had a sitter. The sitter was my wife, my first wife, Carol, and she's a clinical psychologist, and she really wasn't very fond of what I was doing, but she knew I wanted to do it, and so she agreed to help me so that I could do it safely. She wasn't taking notes. We actually set up a video camera one time. But basically it's boring as a person just lying down. It's all internal. I'm not in touch with Carol except through the music in the room and once in a while, an exchange of a word or two, but I'm so far outside of time, space, reality, I don't even relate to what's going on in the room. But she was always there taking care of me. Was she influenced by my sessions? In some ways, yes, and in some ways, no. I mean, Carol never did a psychedelic session. She's a serious vadriana practitioner. She has completed her three year retreat with her vadra teacher. So she's a serious practitioner. She has her own deep commitments to her own spiritual lineage, and so I think it's more of a and I and I learned a lot from her. I mean, I followed her into VAT. In this respect, I think it's more of a side by side play.

Tom Habib  1:19:46  
Yeah, my friend Larry's up next.

Speaker 11  1:19:50  
Yeah, yeah, Chris, thank you for several things, having the courage to take your journey, for having the wherewithal to. Organize it, you know, bring it into the mind, to organize it in a way that then you can next present it to other people. So thank you for all of that, and I really appreciate the last piece of coming off the mountain, because that's what's been very important for me for some 30 years now, is bringing this into the world and facing the confusion, the complexity, the awkwardness, the discomfort, the whatnot of trying to bring from the ineffable into the into language, into interaction with other people, how to not just talk about this, about how to be in a way that is hopefully to some degree reflective of where we what we garnered while we were on the mountain, so to speak. And it all seems to come down to how we're going to be right here, right now, and even in this moment that we're talking with one another. Yeah, and how can we bring that all just to be present? Okay, on a lesser interesting note, maybe is, I'm curious as to why the word diamond, once you get into all these step stages, degrees, domains, realms, whatever out there, the word diamond shows up, of all things, yeah, our diamond.

Chris Bache  1:21:27  
It having experienced the light itself, the diamond is kind of the most natural image that comes to mind. Perhaps I'm influenced by the fact of vadna, the diamond way you know that part is in the background. The image of diamond is not uncommon in the terma text, trying to describe these subtle levels of consciousness. So it just it came naturally out of the experience itself. Yeah. I mean, it's I want to mention, and I think integration, I'm glad that it's getting more and more attention, because we're finding that we can blow through the levels and reach out and have extraordinary experiences with increasing predictability, but to have an experience, and to internalize and hold on to the experience, and then to really digest it, make it part of your being. That's a long, long process, and I think we kind of over emphasize the dying of seeing and under emphasize the dying of keeping. I will say that after coming back from my and I, you know, I don't do any high dose LSD work anymore. I've done some low dose sessions of different sorts, and Ayahuasca and Psilocybin and different things. But I am continuing. But after I finished my sessions, in my meditation, the universe said to me, 20 years in 20 years out which I took to mean, it would take me about 20 years to integrate the 20 years of a session. And I thought at the time, about right,

Speaker 11  1:23:13  
if you're lucky,

Chris Bache  1:23:16  
now I'm thinking I was naive. I was very I seriously underestimated how many years, how many incarnations it would take to internalize, you know, totally integrate these sessions. Now my focus is as on, yeah, we do this for integration. There's therapeutic integration, and then there's this, that and the other. But in the end, I'm, I'm faced confessing that I'm an absolute failure in integration, because I've been able to integrate the language, I've been able to integrate the memories and hold the memories and whatnot, but in terms of embodying those realities, I mean, I truly wonder, how did, how does, how does a finite being embody infinity? How does a time bound being exquisitely tuned to time and space embody deep time or no time? And how do you embody the love? How can you be as loving to other beings as you have felt the universe being to you, and you know that you're supposed to be that loving to everyone, but that love is so pure and so magnificent that I feel like I'm not anywhere near done integrating those magnificent pieces. So it's a I thought integration would be was an easier task. And in the end, I think what it comes down to is you cannot integrate the infinite into the finite. Your only option is to integrate the finite into the. Infinite. So that means, even though my journey was not about spiritual awakening, in the end, when you're trying to integrate cosmological exploration, you're brought back to basic spirituality. 101, what can you hold right here, right now? What are you able to actualize right here, right now? And that's, that's spiritual practice. You you get brought, brought right back to your cushion.

Speaker 11  1:25:29  
Yeah. So this is, as I like to say, the journey

Chris Bache  1:25:33  
continues. The journey continues. Yeah.

Tom Habib  1:25:37  
So this is a good place to end, the venue where we are, we've come to the end of the time. Thank you everyone for joining.

Tom Habib  1:25:48  
I think I can speak for most of us. This was very rich with the future vision, the future human that we're all interested in and and, Thank you, Chris. So where can they get more information on you? On your books,

Chris Bache  1:26:07  
my website. Chris bache.com, it. It's kind of an unfinished website, because my web designer kind of just jumped ship about three fourths of the way through, and I never quite got it finished. So but it's there, and you can reach me through that. Chris bache.com,

Tom Habib  1:26:25  
thank you. Chris and Kathleen put in the chat one of the docs he wanted to you to have. I can see it right there right now. So quick reminder for everyone. We're going to be meeting again on March 9. That's a TBD, but we're going to try to get someone else from the future human. I thought Chris was an excellent choice to start with, and he was gracious enough to take all of this on when he agreed to speak and come to SDI. There was one more thing I was going to ask him, but I said, I said, I better not wish my luck. So Please RSVP for the next presentation, and you can always make a donation if you're feeling rich, to help us. So we're moving to the informal aspect of this so feel free to make comments whatnot. I know for me is I feel humble after this talk. Is this idea of infinite progression, and one of the breakout groups we talked about, trying to reach second tier, trying to reach yellow levels of stage awareness, it almost seems trivial when You look at the breadth of what Chris articulated, but we are on the path we're on. And as you said, in the end, whatever we can realize the moment. Now, it's not full integration by any means, but I'm way beyond expect that. I hang on to moments of resonance and love and try to participate it. And I think this community does well in this is where we're stealing glimpses. Prometheus got grounded for stealing fire. We're stealing glimpses of the future, and I feel privileged to do that. So with that said, feel free to jump in to the dialog. You have to raise your hand, just jump in.

Speaker 7  1:28:48  
Regis, yeah. So the theme for me, throughout my spiritual explorations and my other explanation or variations, my psychology seems to have a commonality, which I'm hearing also in this and that. And that's you just, I think discard is really, it's the profundity of humility that is required to do any of this work, you know. So that's actually, for me, the I'm struck by a few things. As somebody who's spent the last 15 years trying to unpack my own transformative stuff. It is its own form of transformational work to do that you go through and have these experiences. But then, then there's this, the amount of universe there is is extraordinary. And also what's interesting is right about this time, I also discovered that I had autism. And so one of the things about autism is you have an inability to filter. And so what yoga gave to me was the ability to no longer be. Crushed under the overwhelm of my input, and it became a kind of usable bandwidth situation for me. And so then my ability to do translative work that would actually took me the translative effort, I wrote 5000 answers on Quora, for example, about spirituality, just in an effort to do that, I then was kind of, I think doing what Chris Bache was trying to do is, is just like I went through this experience. And how is it that I'm supposed to it's almost a part of the, you know, like through mushroom trip, you know, you have a time up. You have a workspace. I think you have a time going down. I almost felt like the years I spent in spiritual practice, then I had a workspace there, but now, how am I supposed to land without crashing or going insane, and you know all of that? And it just seems like no matter what I do, I keep being humbled, and that seems to be foundational for everything that I know about and what I heard also in Chris bacheous thing. More than that, I also hear his trans, translative imposition upon his experience, given that he is an academic and had to have a job and couldn't be non functional for months at a time, because he was had to show up in front of students all the time so that just I can see that that boundaried his experience too, and in a certain kind of way, you know. So the humility comes with all that. So thank you guys for having this and and I really appreciate the entire person,

Chris Bache  1:31:37  
you know. I think you're right. Regis, the greatest risk of working with psychedelics is psychic inflation. You can think that just because you've had a remarkable experience, you've become a remarkable person. And that doesn't fly, you know, so it's really important to keep your feet grounded, grounded, grounded. And for me, it was my family and my students who kept me grounded. It just the absolutely, you know, the requirements of being there for them, showing up over and over and over again, and discovering that you don't really have to change much on the outside of your life with these changes are really cooking your insides, and they're taking you some places, and there's a real kind of a need to wear different clothes or do something different on the outside, which that's really just doesn't real. That's a temporary kind of thing. And just sit tight, stay where you are, and let this inner transformation take place. And it's humbling. I mean, it's just really humbling to confront your faults and just to be to stay grounded. Just to stay grounded,

Speaker 11  1:32:43  
yeah, and to be able to laugh at it all, that's part of being humble, yeah.

Speaker 12  1:33:01  
I just like to say thank you, Chris, for doing this work and bringing it back to us and your pioneering life is is a is a beautiful model. Thank you.

Chris Bache  1:33:19  
Thank you, Wheaton, it's been an honor. It's been a true pleasure. And I never imagined when I was doing this work hidden and that there would be this kind of audience and receptivity in my lifetime. Thank you. Michael Pollan, you know, who would have figured, you know, the such a shift in such a short period of time that we're able to have this conversation in so many living rooms across the country? Yeah, yeah.

Speaker 13  1:33:47  
I just want to add my thanks as well, Chris, every time I've heard you, it's been phenomenal, and I'm so grateful you're coming to the conference. And I do want to say I find this book an absolute paradigm shifter. I think it's one of the most important books out there to read. So I hope everybody does read the book, because you can't even, I was thinking you could write 40 books based on the book that you wrote. I mean, one of your chapters could be, could be taken into three or four. It's so dense, but it's also so clear, so beautifully written. So I really, really,

Chris Bache  1:34:20  
thank you. Thank you. I appreciate that. Lynn, I tried to make it as clear as possible, and it took me five years to really boil it down and to make it as transparent as possible, because I wanted it to be available, not just for people who worked with psychedelics, but to be with people who did not take psychedelics. And half of the letters I get are from people who have never taken psychedelics, but they've had a spiritual practice, and they know what I'm talking about because of their practice.

Speaker 6  1:34:51  
Yeah, I have to leave and go play horn, but thank you so much. I saw your french horn. It's. It's a demanding mistress.

Chris Bache  1:35:06  
Hi, Tom,

Speaker 3  1:35:09  
Chris, I got a question that I noticed that it's probably weeded out in all the condensation that you're condensing things that you did during the writing process, but you mentioned the the work you did. I think, um, I don't know what like, like. There's a difference between trip and session. I don't know whether you could talk about why you use the word work, because that sounds like you. You show up, and just who you are is what happens. But could you talk a little bit more about what's the work of it?

Chris Bache  1:35:49  
Yeah, you know, in the Japanese tradition, there is something that the Zen monks call a sashin. A sashin is a period set aside for intense spiritual practice. So it's like a five day, two week meditation retreat, a session. And a session, to me, is kind of an anglicized version of sashin. For me to do a psychedelic session is I'm I'm completely isolated from the world. I've taken myself out of contact with the world. I'm not allowing anything into my mind except what's already there. And I sit and I face what's there, and I take it where it goes as far as I can take it and follow it. And so it is work. And now there are many different psychedelics, many different ways to work with side psychedelics. I'm not trying to generalize in any way, but for me, working with high doses of psychedelics, it takes a tremendous commitment and a willingness to let yourself be dismantled, because it very quickly shatters the boundaries, and you're in foreign territory very early on and year by year, you're going deeper and deeper into foreign territory. It takes time to acclimate. When you break through to a new level of consciousness, you can't always remember everything that you experienced. I take notes. I have gaps in the notes, but go back and again and again and again to the same level of consciousness, you learn how to acclimate. You learn how to stay conscious in this level of consciousness and what was previously a gap narrative you fill in the gaps you get the whole story that's being taught you and my experiences we are taught consistently being tried something. Was trying to teach me certain things that bring me back over and over and over again until it was sure that I understood those things. So it is work. And I think processing the sessions is work. I mean, I developed a strategy for how to capture and how to capture these experiences, so much so that I, you know, there's a little line in the book which I say, I think ineffability is overrated as a measure of mystical experience. You know, it's part of our test whether it's a genuine mystical experience, whether it's ineffable. And I understand that, but I basically think that if you can't say where you've been, you basically just got lost somewhere away. And there's nothing wrong with getting lost, but ineffability, I understand it is, it's hard, but if you really work it hard, you should be able to find words of being able to describe it. Remember that the Zen masters don't have trouble talking about enlightenment to other Zen masters. They can talk about it just fine. They have trouble talking about it to people who have not had the experience. That's when it becomes challenging, right? So we can find words for these things. It inevitably, it's, you know, they're inadequate, but we can find words, you know, I don't know. I'll just mention also to this condensation process I did account not too long ago. I have about 400 words, 400 pages of notes from my sessions. I The passages that I actually include in the book are less than 25% three quarters of the content I did not include, partly because they're repetitious and whatnot. I really try to pick the most powerful passages, but there was a lot left out. Yeah,

Tom Habib  1:39:40  
Bruce in one part, I think about two thirds way to the book you touched upon preparing ourselves to receive the transmissions. I don't think you were talking about under the LSD. I think you were talking about a normal existence. Am I right on that? Point. And could you say something about preparing to receive them? I assume there's being able to read the deeply subtle, being open to that

Chris Bache  1:40:12  
how subtle it is and what form it takes depends upon the form of practice we are doing, and as we open to these realities. So anything I say really would pertain just to my individual situation, not to the pattern as a whole.

Chris Bache  1:40:40  
I think we know what transmission is about when we're talking about it with a spiritual teacher. And you know, in the Tibetan tradition, they give a practice in three different levels. The first level is they teach the mechanics of the practice. The second level, they teach the meaning of the practice. But the third level, the most important level, is the transmission of lung, the seed energy of the practice. You receive a seed from the teacher who has already brought the practice to maturity in their own being, and when they give this lung, they're transmitting a distilled essence of the practice that you then water and nourish in your practice. So that's my con, my context for thinking about transmission, and I think this kind of is true for my psychedelic context, and that is, I was put through enormous purification processes in order to receive the teachings that came from these levels of consciousness. And if I'm right that there is a certain parallel between what we do on our cushion and what takes place in a psychedelic session and what's happening historically, then it supports the intuition that I have, that we are experiencing a shift in divine influx, so to speak with there is a rise in energy coming up underneath us. There is more information becoming available, not only at the physical level, through the internet and all this tremendous impact there, but at the center of our being, there are teachings and insights and understandings which are rising up inside of us, which we can catch. But to catch them, we have to prepare ourselves to receive them. You know, we must prepare ourselves and empty ourselves of everything which is small in order to catch pieces of that which is large coming to us. And so I think transmission is a larger, broader category.

Speaker 7  1:42:49  
Yeah, yeah, you're reminding me that that the when you get initiation, in my tradition, I got to visualize it as, like, there's a kind of a silver tube that's kind of going into me, and it's like there are certain things kind of flowing into me, and then I end up basically just being like a small little reservoir of a thing out of which certain amount can come and my guru is a giant reservoir, You know, of a lake or whatever, during saying where I might be just this little bottle, you know, but, but what's beautiful about what you're talking about also? And then I would like to just point out the humility of saying that you don't think it maybe applies to everything else, but the things that you're saying so closely resemble my own that I might want to disagree with you on that, but I understand the humility of saying it like that. So thank you.

Chris Bache  1:43:46  
Okay, yeah,

Speaker 9  1:43:49  
I was curious. Um, I had a phone call with a there's a gentleman, Simon Dwan. I found an article of his in Scientific American magazine. He was writing about, like, oh, he doesn't think the scientists will ever figure out if reality is a simulation or not, but I feel like, from my perspective, like I know it is, and I'm curious, like, if the idea, I don't know if you saw the movie The Matrix, if you have any thoughts related to these kind of things,

Chris Bache  1:44:18  
well, that's A pretty popular theme in sci fi isn't the simulation and the complexity that we're living. And quantum theory is telling us that everything we see in the visible world is underpinned by this in this larger, subtle, real quantum reality. Now 95 96% of reality is dark energy and dark matter. So that's telling us over and over again, that what we're living is not the whole of what's what's real. And to me, physical reality, it could be described as the skin on an apple, you know, and it's and the apple grows the bigger the skin gets. The universe is like. Like that. It gets bigger and bigger. But when you can, when you fall underneath the level of time, space, reality, fall deeper into it. You're falling deeper into the apple, toward the center of the apple, and in the center of the apple, of course, it's all light, even physical reality is composed of light. But at the center of the apple is most radiant, beautiful, extraordinary light brilliance in so I think this idea that there is a larger reality out there that structures and informs and receives this reality, then after that, then our psychology takes over. And so do we see that reality as threatening? Do we see that reality as demanding or manipulative? Do we see it as a dark and hostile reality, or do we see it as a beautiful, magnificent co creating reality, you know, and my experience is that the mother universe is extremely so, so creative, so intelligent, so wise, so loving and compassionate. And of course, you just looking at time and space. If you want to see the wisdom of life or the little or the compassion of life, you have to look very, very deep, because if you look on the surface, it doesn't look wise and it doesn't look compassion and it doesn't look lovely, it's a mean ass son of a bitch. But you have to step back and step back and step back and look deep in order to really see the wisdom that's built into this amazing laboratory that we're part of, of growing the human experiment, yeah,

Speaker 9  1:46:43  
sorry, fascinating, yeah,

Chris Bache  1:46:45  
sure is, isn't

Speaker 11  1:46:51  
it? Yeah, Chris, I'm not sure how to draw this up. I you. I'll speak for myself, some of the experiences I had in like the first time was I took nine months, dropped out, just meditated several hours a day. Then what? Two years later, I did it for six months. And some of the experiences I had were so mind blowingly profound that in loving that I was I was just left sobbing, sobbing and bliss doesn't isn't a word that really covers it. It just experiences up. Just never had, never could imagine I would ever have Yeah, and they just left me words Yeah, like, just a pool of sobbing wonderfulness, yeah, just, and I just know that you had a lot of those experiences. It wasn't just all rational, oh yeah, that, oh yeah. This opened up into that. And did it? No, it's like some of these ones that showed up in front of you. It's like, oh my god. I mean, just no words for it. No language, no.

Speaker 11  1:48:30  
It's like, you're giving words for this stuff. It just, yeah, yeah.

Chris Bache  1:48:42  
It's like when the universe's heart touches your heart, it just explodes it into the most magnificent, dimensional radiance that it just just there's nothing to do except have a good cry of joy. It's just so joyful. It's just so extraordinary. And that's why, you know, the word that I give in the book for the universe, in this way, is my beloved, because contact with it was so overwhelming. It became a love affair. I mean, it really, I talked about the rumpled sheets where we made love. It's a love affair, and it's it does it inspires such a hunger for it, this eternal hunger that's in our being, not only to reunite, but to bring that reality, to experience it wherever we are right now, right here. It's so deep. It just, it's a it's a heartache. To be separated from it, even for a day, and to touch it is just joy, just joy in the body, joy in the heart and mind.

Speaker 11  1:49:53  
And it's in it's more than a worldly joy. You know, because we all humans, you know we can experience joy in our daily lives and. Maybe not every day, but you know what I mean, yeah. And these were experiences that were, I'm a pretty articulate guy and like that, I had such difficulty being able to put into words some of these experiences, yeah, other than just like the your knees collapse, I wasn't standing at the time that these were happening. But just like these, knee buckling, Soul buckling, Mind Blow, line, mind blowing. Not even know how to, knowing how to be with it, other than just you can't not be with it. You can't be with you. Just there. It's happening. Yeah, it's an overwhelm in terms of what the mind can make sense of. And it's in it's wonderful in the highest sense, pure, clean, clear. And you can't capture it. You cannot capture it. You can't bring it back. At least for me, I had to leave it there. I didn't know how to bring it back. And just what gives me justification to want to keep evolving expanding, be it through your model or anybody's model that's about being an evolutional being of consciousness, there's such anchoring experiences that I can't ignore them in terms of my daily life anyhow,

Chris Bache  1:51:25  
yeah, and no one could ever talk you out of them.

Speaker 11  1:51:28  
Yeah. I mean, that's just, it's like, you go where I went then try to talk me out. Yeah, exactly yes.

Tom Habib  1:51:36  
But isn't it interesting that at the moment of that type of joy. We touch sadness too.

Speaker 11  1:51:46  
I don't experience. Tell

Tom Habib  1:51:49  
me about that. Tom Well, I know in therapy, like when, when somebody reaches a level of intimacy and they start crying, it's this deep hunger and absence they've had for so long. Yeah, and so in the midst of joy, there's actually sadness. When you two were talking, I could feel that cosmic hunger to know the mind of God, and when you get a glimpse of it, I think it's the same thing. It's kind of good because there's a humbling awe going on that moment. And it's almost like it's saying to you, you haven't seen anything yet. I know you said that there's so many worries a couple times.

Speaker 7  1:52:37  
This also reminds me of the book Quantum Questions that Ken Wilber wrote about how, you know, all the writings of the guys who did the work on quantum mechanics were all very sciencey beforehand, and they were all very mystical afterward. And it seems to me that what you did was actually examine paradox at a kind of cosmological level, whereas they were kind of looking at it in a I think the expression that I use in the breakout room is you were looking at it through a telescope, and they were looking at through a microscope, you know. And so they like, there's a you can see the infinite in either direction, you know. And I've had some mushroom trips where I've had, like, a Taurus like thing, and I've got it was literally Ken Wilber in the middle talking to me about what was going on on both ends of that thing. Do you know I'm saying it's like as the, my, my, you know, Avatar of Vishnu, or whatever, you know, to explain to me was all going on. So it's, it's really interesting to see your book in light of having already read Kant impressions. There's a lot of parallels there.

Speaker 11  1:53:45  
Yeah, it's interesting.

Chris Bache  1:53:49  
Well, folks, it's approaching 930 on my time, and I haven't seen my wife all day, and she's just come back while we were doing a talk here. I think I need to go be a good husband for a while, how much I enjoyed our time together. Really appreciate the invitation. Appreciated our discussion a great deal. I hope to see many of you at the conference in May, and when you're there, please introduce yourself in you know, track me down. I'd love to see you there

Tom Habib  1:54:21  
and you're welcome. Okay, Chris, I'm Chris.

Speaker 5  1:54:25  
Thank you, Chris, yeah, thank you everybody. Thank you my heart. Thank you bye, bye everybody. Thank you Tom Bye

Speaker 2  1:54:35  
For further information, including upcoming events, resources, links to our Facebook and meetup pages and our fabulous donate button. Please visit our website at San diegointegral.org donations are greatly appreciated and help us to continue to provide information and connection within the integral community. You.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
