Jeffrey Mishlove  0:00  
Allowed is presented by the California Institute for Human science, okay? And then I'll shut that

Emmy Vadnais  0:06  
and then I'm going to go ahead and share my screen. Minimizing.

Jeffrey Mishlove  0:12  
There we go. And so as of this moment, announcements are being sent out to one of our followers, and they'll be logging in, and so they'll be able to hear everything we say, and their screen will sort of look like this. They'll see little thumbnails of our images. So in just

Emmy Vadnais  0:37  
a minute, I'll start the countdown clock timer, and then for those listening and joining, welcome and thank you for being with us. If you want to chat in where you're joining from in the world, from your neck of the word, neck of the woods. In the world, we'd love to hear where you're from. And then in just a minute, I'll start the timer.

Jeffrey Mishlove  0:56  
I might mention for people who are watching the archival video, and they're wondering, why do they have to sit through 10 minutes of our conversation beforehand, before we begin the program? And it's because, once we start the timer and go live, YouTube automatically makes it this archival recording, which YouTube then takes public. So I suppose the option would be for us to capture a recording on on our hard drive and then edit it before we let it go public. So in theory, we could edit out the first 10 minutes because I I got a complaint from a viewer who was unhappy that they had to least they didn't understand. They could fast forward, I suppose, to the beginning of the video. So for viewers who who don't want to sit through our preliminary conversation? Fast forward at 10 minutes,

Emmy Vadnais  2:06  
right? That's why there's a timer. It says nine minutes until livestream, but this is yeah, to give a notification so that our subscribers will be notified that we're going live in a few minutes and if we were to take it down and re upload it, the only thing is, is that we've already shared this particular URL all over the internet, so then we would lose this particular

Jeffrey Mishlove  2:30  
Yeah, would have to have a new URL. I kind of like keeping things the way they are, because I if I were to start downloading the and we're on Zoom. It's a Zoom video, which is not the highest quality from the Zoom recorder, to be honest. And then I would want to, anytime you mention another person, I would want to insert a book cover or something the way we normally do for our interviews, which would create additional delays, but this way, the archival video goes up as soon as we finish talking,

Emmy Vadnais  3:06  
yeah, it's pretty easy just to fast forward a YouTube video to when it actually begins, and

Jeffrey Mishlove  3:14  
typically by the time the day is over, there are three or four times as many people who watch the archival video is who were with us live.

Chris Bache  3:25  
How many years have you been doing this? Jeffrey,

Jeffrey Mishlove  3:28  
I started in 1972 doing interviews, but a YouTube channel. This is our 10th year on YouTube. Okay? I began KPFA radio, Pacifica radio, nonprofit station in Berkeley back in 1972

Chris Bache  3:50  
that's a lot of good information streamed out to a lot of people.

Jeffrey Mishlove  3:56  
Yeah, really, and I was guided to do it by a dream, really, yes, yeah, at a time in my life when I didn't own a radio or a television and I was a long haired Berkeley hippie. I didn't believe in radio or television. I thought they were all phony baloney, but I had this dream, and I acted on it and changed my mind, and for most of the last half century, I've been doing interviews.

Chris Bache  4:33  
Wow, that's fascinating. Another example of the wisdom of the deep consciousness of the world, communicating and giving us directions in our private lives, our so called Private Lives. Yeah,

Jeffrey Mishlove  4:53  
and I'm very interested in people who have had what I would call life changing dreams. Yes, because that, that dream that I had, was a life changer. I mean, here I am, half a century later, still acting on that information.

Emmy Vadnais  5:12  
Yeah, yeah. And live streams have been on YouTube. Have been, what, three, four years, Jeff, you've been doing these,

Jeffrey Mishlove  5:27  
yeah, maybe even,

Emmy Vadnais  5:32  
I think maybe five years.

Jeffrey Mishlove  5:35  
Yeah. In fact, yes, five years.

Emmy Vadnais  5:37  
Emmy, like, usually every two to three weeks, we have fabulous guests on like you, Chris

Chris Bache  5:45  
and how did you get into this particular role? Emmy, what drew you here?

Emmy Vadnais  5:55  
Well, Jeff was a guest on my podcast back in 2018 and I originally learned about him and thinking aloud on public television back in 1987 when I was probably 13 years old, and he was, yeah, interviewing wonderful people. But even even then, on public television from 1986 to 2002 although my understanding was is that it was sent out to on the satellite in 1987 so I began watching it, and was just fascinated and very intrigued with the information. I didn't understand all of it at the time because I was 13, but I understood enough that I wanted to learn more. And in retrospect, I think it really did help set the tone for my career in understanding more about holistic health, intuition, spirituality, consciousness, and even back then, Jeff you, were talking about UFOs and interviewing people like Jacques valet and John Mack and and I thought, well, this man is really intelligent. There must be something to all of this. And then I was researching for a book I wrote and about intuition, and Jeff's name kept coming up. And then I realized, oh, Jeffrey Mishlove, he was the host of that program. And then I realized he had a doctorate in parapsychology, which was very downplayed on that original program and and then I thought, well, I'd love to talk to him, and I'll invite him on my podcast. And he said, Yes. And then in 2020 Jeff, you put out a call for volunteers, and then I started volunteering with you. And then he won the Bigelow essay competition for the best evidence for the continuation of consciousness in the afterlife in 2021 so he invited me to be a guest host, and then shortly thereafter, I became the co host. And then now he's invited other guest hosts, and yeah, I'm just grateful to be here and help share this information and learn from one of the best, best people in the field, doing this

Chris Bache  8:06  
in such in such a way, our lives are all intertwined around each other, aren't they?

Emmy Vadnais  8:12  
Yeah, yeah. Very true. And Chris, I know we're going to learn more about you in a few minutes. When did you start? I know you bet you were a professor for many, many years. When did you start public speaking or getting interested in these kind of topics?

Chris Bache  8:30  
Well, you know, when I started the LSD work in 79 I had to keep it pretty under tight wraps. I mean, I just couldn't bring it out publicly at all. And it wasn't until I wrote dark night, early dawn, which was my first book on psychedelic work, which which came out in 2000 that I began going to conferences and began to teach at CIS in that area. But I really didn't go public until I retired from the University in 2013 and then I, you know, I was working on LSD in the mind of the universe for five years during that period. And when it finally came out in 2019 I became, I was more public, just increasingly public. So I was out of the psychedelic closet, formally, kind of when that book came out.

Emmy Vadnais  9:26  
Yeah, and it's a wonderful book, LSD and the mind of the universe. I really enjoyed reading it. And I like how you also put many of your session notes in there, which was you bring the reader. I felt like I was sometimes along on the trip with you.

Chris Bache  9:45  
Yeah, that's what I wanted to do. My sense was that in order to have the philosophical conversation about the potential of psychedelics, first people have to understand what happens in deep sessions. So the first task was descriptive, and then later the second or third round would be more evaluative and analytic. So I really tried to bring the reader along with me into those sessions. So I had to learn a whole new way of writing. I had to lose my academic voice and develop a different voice.

Emmy Vadnais  10:21  
Well, you did it beautifully, I would say, you nailed it.

Unknown Speaker  10:23  
Thank you. Yeah, so

Emmy Vadnais  10:27  
we just got about a minute before we officially begin the program.

Jeffrey Mishlove  10:36  
In retrospect that the the impulse that I had to act on that dream and to be alert to it and so on, I was primed for that from having had LSD a number of times prior.

Chris Bache  10:59  
Yeah, and with the depth of our interweaving continues to go, Yeah,

Jeffrey Mishlove  11:27  
all right, welcome everybody. I'm Jeffrey Mishlove. I'm with my co host Emmy Vadnais and our honored guest Chris Bache and Emmy. Will you introduce Chris?

Emmy Vadnais  11:39  
Yes, hello and welcome everybody. We're so grateful to have Chris Bache with us today, who is professor emeritus in the department of philosophy and religious study studies at Youngstown State University in Ohio, where he taught for 33 years. He is also adjunct faculty at the California Institute of integral studies, Emeritus, excuse me, Emeritus fellow at the Institute of Noetic Sciences and on the Advisory Council of Grof legacy training. Chris is author of life cycles, reincarnation in the web of life, dark night, early dawn, the living classroom, teaching and collective consciousness and LSD and the mind of the universe, diamonds from heaven, and his website is Chris bache.com with an E at the end. Welcome Chris. We're so happy to have you here today to get us started. Do you want to just go ahead and share a little bit about your background, and we also want to let people know that Chris has been a guest on new thinking, allowed with a recorded interview talking about psychedelics and the Cosmic Mind.

Chris Bache  12:50  
Well, I'm actually the last person you would have thought from the beginning of my life to end up writing a book on describing what happens on the long series of high dose LSD sessions. I was raised in the Deep South, in Mississippi. I was a seminarian in the early days. I was studying to be a Catholic priest, but eventually I left that because celibacy and I didn't get along very well. Got degrees in theology and New Testament criticism and eventually philosophy of religion from Brown University. So I had a very classical, very traditional upbringing. The psychedelic 60s passed me by entirely, and it wasn't until I got to graduate school. I mean, I got to teaching in 1978 and I was looking around for where to take my research that I encountered the work of Stanislav Grof and his book, realms of the human unconscious was a life changer for me, because I saw immediately the philosophical significance of his work. If what he was saying was true, it had profound implications for how we could do philosophy in the future, not just healing, but actually explore the metaphysical structure underlying structure of reality. So uncomfortable, I made the decision to knew I needed to do this work. I knew I had to begin my own psychedelic work, and I was uncomfortable breaking the law, but I chose to begin very private, circumscribed work in this modality using Stan Grof protocol. So I divided my life into two parts. During my day job, I was a traditional member of the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at young sound state and kind of my night job was doing working with psychedelics, exploring the I was healing my own psyche, working and exploring the deep structure of the collective psyche, and then what lies beyond the collective psyche. And I worked for four years. I stopped for six years for reasons that I give in the book, and then I resume for another 10 years. So basically. Basically between the time when I was 30 and 50 years old, I did 73 high dose LSD sessions using a tight therapeutic protocol, and then I took another 20 years to digest and assimilate those experiences and to kind of connect the dots in those experiences before publishing LSD in the mind of the universe in 2019 so actually, it was after I finished my sessions in one of my meditations, I heard this voice say, 20 years in 20 years out, which I took to mean that it would take me at least 20 years to integrate and digest all the experiences I had collected in those 20 years. Now, I think that might have been an overly optimistic assessment, because I don't think I have nearly integrated all the experiences that I had collected in those first 20 years. Wow.

Emmy Vadnais  15:58  
So you feel like you're still integrating the experiences Very

Chris Bache  16:02  
much so. In fact, it raises, it has raised substantial kind of intellectual questions, how do you possibly integrate experiences which so radically transcend the conditions of time and space and our consciousness inside time and space. If you have temporary experiences which go radically beyond spatial consciousness, radically on temporal consciousness and linear time, how do you what does it mean even to integrate those experiences? I mean, it really comes down. The things I'm thinking about these days is, what does integration even look like? What does it mean when you're dealing with such radical experiences, if you're dealing with lower dose work or gentler psychedelics, where the experiences come closer to your world inside time and space, integration is less demanding, but if you really open up to the very deep waters of the deep psyche, integration becomes a more substantive issue.

Emmy Vadnais  17:09  
All right? Well, we're getting lots of questions coming in, and I think this question from Robert Bushman might be a good place to start, perhaps, is, what is consciousness? Is there an ultimate reality, or is it infinitely fractal? I guess there's a few questions in here. How can an individual's conscious awareness expand without psychedelics? How can one remember past lives, which actually is a maybe a separate question, but maybe starting out with, what is consciousness?

Chris Bache  17:39  
Yeah, well, you know, I'm happy to let the psychologists and philosophers tear their hair out on that one. I'm willing to sort of go with whatever definition they come up with, as long as it's sufficiently broad to incorporate the total phenomenology of consciousness. I mean, sort of simply, consciousness comes from calm shield to know. With consciousness is that with which we know? So it is the knowing function. It is the awareness of our cognitive capacity through which we know anything else. And so again, then we ask the question, well, how big is consciousness? We have a tendency to think that consciousness kind of fits inside our skull, but now increasingly, we realize that's not an adequate understanding because of all sorts of empirical, para psychological, parapsychological research. So I think of it more as consciousness is a field that our brain allows us to consolidate and structure inside our physical existence. But consciousness in its own right, is an field. And being a field, it's open ended, and it's then, if you ask, how big is that field? Then we get into the real cosmological adventure, because we find, at least, I found that in if you really go deep into your psyche, you drop first into the personal unconscious, into your personal psyche. If you keep pushing deeper, you drop into the collective psyche, the territory Jung described. But you can go deeper than that and drop below the entire psyche of the human species. You can transcend the species psyche, and then you're in a you're in dimensions of consciousness that truly, I think of it as the either the mind of God or I prefer to think of it as the mind of the universe, that as vast as the universe is, you know, and we know who have a rough approximation of how many billions of galaxies are in the universe, and how huge it is, how old it is, that consciousness, that this universe has a mind, and the mind is as deep and broad and old as the universe's body is so. So that my individual experience of consciousness is a simple drop, a fractal aspect of the totality of consciousness that flows. And that's why I gave the book the title LSD in the mind of the universe. Because when you go very deep using a very powerful and circumscribed protocol, you drop into deeper and deeper layers, and you're given the opportunity to explore the very nature of of physical reality

Emmy Vadnais  20:31  
itself. I think we just lost your video. Chris, I

Chris Bache  20:34  
lost the video here. Let's see what's the audio. Okay, let me see if I can

Jeffrey Mishlove  20:40  
guess if the camera is pointing somewhere else.

Chris Bache  20:43  
Yeah, let me see if I don't know why it dropped, but I can shift to a different

Emmy Vadnais  20:48  
There we go. Okay, there's we've got you. We've got a view of you now here. So, Okay, wonderful. Okay, good.

Jeffrey Mishlove  20:54  
You are back. Well, I think it's important to emphasize early on in our discussion, or to repeat what you said in your earlier interview with Emmy, that you are not recommending that other people do what you did, take many high doses of LSD that way, and I know one of our Viewers has raised the question about what kind of people, or what populations of people should not use psychedelics

Chris Bache  21:28  
first, I absolutely agree. I mean, I really do not recommend that people adopt the protocol that I adopted, knowing what I know at the end of this journey. I if I were starting it from scratch, I would be much gentler on myself. I would work with much lower doses. I would balance the organic psychedelics with the synthetic psychedelics. I just would take a much gentler approach in but I was young when I did this work. I had a number of assumptions that I was making that turned out not to be accurate, and I would just be much gentler and much more circumscribed in the project. And there are many, many people, types of people, who shouldn't be working with psychedelics there for either physiological reasons or psychological reasons to work with the amplifying quality means psychedelics are amplifiers of consciousness. They take what is far away and make it available to you, and they take what is low volume and make it higher volume. So it's a tremendous kind of inversion, an explosion of awareness. And if you are prepared for it, if you have the discipline for it, and if you have the training to navigate those transitions, and if you're working with professionals who can help you navigate okay, but there are a lot of people, I think, our best base, and probably the majority of people, are Best kind of working in gentler techniques, yoga and meditation or trans dancing, a number of things which have the same amplifying effect in a more gentle fashion, which do in which we can do a great deal of very good work without taking psychedelics at all. In fact, in the mail that I've gotten from my writing on psychedelics. Many of the people who have written me have never taken psychedelics, or they've taken psychedelics once or twice early in their life, but they've been a meditator for 50 or 50 years, and they are engaging the cosmology that emerges in my story and comparing it to the cosmology that has emerged for them in their meditative experience and finding strong parallels. And so the deepest level, the issue is not psychedelics. The issue is consciousness, the boundaries and the functions of consciousness itself. So but some people should kind of stay away from these powerful amplifiers.

Emmy Vadnais  24:01  
Yeah, and how many micrograms? What was the dose that you were usually working at? Because I know after we did that interview, people were some people were chatting in and asking what those levels were. And I think you, like you said, you would go lower if you were to do it over again.

Chris Bache  24:21  
After the first three sessions, which are medium dose sessions, I worked at 500 to 600 micrograms, which is right at the body's maximum capacity to absorb. Meaning, if you took more, you don't necessarily go deeper more or less. So I was working at very high levels that basically have the potential to just shatter, you know, the structures of consciousness and take you temporarily beyond your traditional ways of knowing yourself and knowing the world and again, I would be much gentler in the early days. Stanislav. Differentiates between those psychedelic B really launched later, over up to maybe reasons. But at Spring Grove, they experimented with working with the population of clients who were dying of cancer. They were they were terminal patients, and they were trying to address death anxiety, and they worked with high dose LSD sessions, essentially trying to trigger a Near-Death Experience, so these people could have an insight into where they were going, and therefore relieve the anxiety of death. And it was quite successful. But the protocol limited high dose work to three sessions. And I came along after years later, and I thought, well, if you could work successfully three times, you could do it more than three times. And so I adopted that protocol. I eventually, in time, I learned I had a capacity in an aptitude for working at those levels. I could, I could let go and expand into the deep psyche comfortably enough. And I also did not have problems consolidating. I tended to consolidate comfortably and strongly. And it's just, it's, it is an unusual, an unusually intense protocol. I wouldn't do it again. I'd do it differently.

Emmy Vadnais  26:20  
Yeah, in fact, you have shared, I believe in your book, and when we had our previous conversation that near death experiencers are the group of people you often relate to with your own experiences with

Chris Bache  26:35  
LSD, is that right? Yeah, I feel the closest, in some ways, to people who have near death experiences of any population, because by when their body almost dies, they are catapulted into very deep states of consciousness. They get glimpses of the world. They engage the world. And I think there's a strong overlap between what happens in a deep Near-Death Experience and what happens in a deep psychedelic, therapeutically structured experience. The difference is that primarily near death, people get only one take on that reality. And if you work with psychedelics like I have, you get multiple immersions, multiple initiations into that reality so that what becomes a flashing one time exposure becomes a journey and becomes a communion that is repeated and deepened over time.

Jeffrey Mishlove  27:33  
Yeah. Okay. We have a question from a viewer whose YouTube name is greasy, slick, who would like to know if you've ever experimented with DMT, which is considered, I believe, the most powerful psychedelic

Chris Bache  27:53  
I have experience with other psychedelics other than LSD, though I consider my LSD work to be my primary body of work, I have had some experiences with DMT, Wilson, of course, and MDMA and salvia, Durham and San Pedro. I've had experiences with five Meo, DMT, which is an extremely powerful short acting psychedelic. I don't have a lot of experiences with five Meo DMT, I feel like I'm just beginning to nibble on that after a long period of not working with psychedelics, because I stopped my work primarily in 1999 and much of my work with these other psychedelics came after 1999 when I wasn't so much concerned with pushing new boundaries, I was concerned with helping me integrate the work that I had already done. But yeah, five Meo DMT is an extraordinarily powerful and provocative psychedelic, and I've had limited experience with ketamine, the high dose ketamine sessions.

Jeffrey Mishlove  29:04  
Are you able to draw any meaningful comparisons between those entheogens and LSD?

Chris Bache  29:13  
Well, that's a conversation we'd have to go into very carefully, and I don't think I have enough experience to really and I don't have enough knowledge of other people's experiences to be able to make a fair comparison at this time. I do think that there is a certain advantage to psychedelics that open a long window, a window that stays open for a long period of time, like LSD, or maybe a little less Psilocybin, where, if you're dealing with something like five Meo DMT, it's a very, very intense immersion, but it's a very short acting, a very short window, and you don't have as much time for. The infinite consciousness that you're accessing or entering into communion with to impact you and to clean you and to transform your life. And I think this is what Rick Strassman found in his book on DMT, the spirit molecule, where he took people with DMT into very intense experiences, and some of them had very deep experiences, but in the end, he found that they did not change their lives very much. These experiences were not deeply transformative. And I personally think that part of the reason is because it is so short acting versus a long acting large window. But then again, even a psychedelic like LSD, relatively speaking, is relatively short acting in terms of compared to other meditational practices, for example, where the window is open for a much longer period of time. So if we combine meditation and contemplative and yogic disciplines, with the psychedelic practices which give you a window to experience, then you have, I think maybe the optimal conditions for balancing the virtues of one and the virtues of the other and amplifying the transformative effect.

Jeffrey Mishlove  31:23  
Wonder off hand. How many people who do take LSD, and it's been widely used in our culture, how many of those people really have had their lives transformed the way you have, and I think I have to say the way I have, but I'm under the impression that many, many people of our generation took LSD and they weren't even trying to transform their lives. It was more a question of partying.

Chris Bache  31:54  
Yeah, I think that's the case. And nothing wrong with that. You know, I have no criticism of that, but it is, to me, a kind of a wasted opportunity. It so much. Ha, hinges the to me, the productivity of these really, for philosophical exploration or therapeutic applications, depends on how you handle these stories of band aware, if you kind of stay in touch with the world, and you're having a time, you're at a concert, or you're in nature, or you're with some friends, then that lends itself to a certain kind of milieu, a certain level of encounter. But if you isolate yourself, if you adopt kind of a zazen atmosphere, if you create a Kiva of practice where you're isolated from the world. You're wearing eyeshades. So you know that whatever you're experiencing is coming only from within yourself, and if you engage that with you know conscious intention, singular intent, and allow it to take you where it wants to take you, which is often not where you would like to go. It takes you into the places that you hurt the most, and then it takes you into places that you don't even understand why it hurts so much when you're going into it, because you're going beyond the edge of the maps of the personal psyche. But if you focus it with that intent, then something very exciting opens up as a possibility, because you not only have the opportunity to heal all these knots that are kind of locked in your heart from however many incarnations you've had, but you also, as these kind of are healed and are unlocked your receptivity To the larger fields of consciousness, which are always there, always bringing their energy to us, increases and that really, that I think is worth a hell of a lot of concerts.

Emmy Vadnais  33:55  
Yeah, Chris, can you expand a little bit more about what your session structures were like, because somebody commented in the conversation that we had, they asked, Why didn't he just go out and hang out in the mountains and nature and and how you had somebody there with you as well. And I think you look to Stanislav Grof for how to go about that, is that, right?

Chris Bache  34:21  
Yeah, I, you know, I was Stan's work is so formidable, and his intellectual synthesis of so many traditions is so important that he became my kind of foundation for doing this work. And again, remember, I was, I was doing this work in Ohio. I was a long way from San Francisco. I was not part of a psychedelic community. I was not part of an Ayahuasca group that going down to Peru regularly to work with indigenous shamans there. I was really working alone, and I adopted the protocol that Stan had outlined in his book LSD psychotherapy, published. 1980 right in the very early years of my work. And so my protocol, and first, I think it's it's wonderful to go sit in nature and do a lower, moderate dose of psychedelics and enter into that kind of communion that can open. It's just not what I did. So my days would always start early in the morning. I would have everything set up. I would be either at a third floor of our home or later when we started having children. I worked in my wife's office. Carol was a clinical psychologist, and she was my sitter for all of my sessions. So we would start in the early morning, I would do meditation, yoga, body stretching and whatnot, and then we would begin the session. They were all guided with very carefully selected music. So that Carol had a library of music available to her, because you want to pace the rhythm of the shopping the full peak and the decline of the section. Different types of music are appropriate for different stages of that process. And you can get lots of examples of this music from Holotropic Breathwork sites, which often catalog extensive libraries for this type of work. So basically, I would spend all day lying down with eyeshades, and the only way my sitter primarily related to me was through the music. One time I took, we took a movie camera and set it up to see if it would be interesting. But actually, it was frightfully boring, because it's all the action is taking place inside. It doesn't show much on the outside, except periodically throwing up, which is, you know, not that great to watch, but sorry, all day, and then usually by mid late afternoon sessions wrapping up. But even after the session, the formal session wraps up, the tail is still very long, and I learned that you have to give a lot of space, a lot of time, because that you're it's the long tail is a good opportunity to reflect upon and to integrate the insights that's emerged. Because these insights can come and they can be very powerful, but like a dream, you can lose them, and it's important to hold on to them as well as you can. And so my custom was the day after session, the next morning, I would spend that morning as long as it took to write out an complete as thorough and account of each session. And I found that I had to develop a strategy for sort of maximizing recall. I began I would take the playlist that was used in the session in exactly the order in which the music was played, because my sitter had kept a record, and then I would play the music while I was writing, and I would play each piece of music over and over till I felt I had captured as best I could what happened during that part of the Muse session. And then I went on to the next base of music and the next piece of music, so that by the time I was finished, I had as reliable an account as I could create of the session. And once it's in, like that, once it's locked in, I don't change it, it's it's locked. And I found that if I attempted to make improvements on the text later, my improvements often diluted aspects or they took the sharp edge off of the focus. So I basically respected the text, the sessions, as my primary text, and that's why, in my book, all the sessions are produced in a italic text to separate them from the commentation. Commentator that commentator that I put after the session.

Emmy Vadnais  38:57  
Yeah, well, that's fascinating. I believe in psychological terms. It's called state dependent memory, where you so you were using your music that you were listening to during the session to help reach

Chris Bache  39:08  
because day after and you're still sort of one foot in, one foot out, you know, you're and it's what I call kind of standing at the edge of the well, you're you're one foot in and one foot out. And by playing the music while you have your cognitive capacities back, you can let your mind go back into that territory and capture it.

Jeffrey Mishlove  39:33  
Question here a couple of people have raised it in different ways, and it has to do with the way we titled this program using your phrase diamond Luminosity. So one of our viewers, Celia funk, who is also one of our volunteers and just had a baby recently, congratulations. She says, this may be a silly question, but does the title diamond Luminosity. Luminosity refer to actual diamonds. And then a different viewer asked, Well, is it related to the Diamond Sutra?

Chris Bache  40:10  
Yeah, that's not a silly question at all. Maybe a little bit of background, the phrase diamond Luminosity points to states of consciousness that I entered in the last five years of my work. So I had already gone through kind of what Stan Grof calls the perinatal process, and gone through a really solid ego death. I'd gone into what I came to call, later the ocean of suffering, working at the collective psyche level. Had gone into archetypal reality. I'd gone into causal level reality, many adventures in that process, and I was feeling absolutely philosophically satiated and complete by that time, because I had been I was having experiences of profound oneness with existence and even touching the meta, cosmic void and having standing under the waterfall of cosmic love. So I was existentially very satisfied. But in the last five years and 26 sessions, I was catapulted after one more series of death and rebirth experiences into a state of consciousness that was light, but exceptionally pure, exceptionally clear, light, clear beyond imagination. Now I had access light many times before when you have a an ego death experience, or you have other deep experiences. Many people encounter the light this, and it's the light is kind of the signature of these radically expanded divine states of consciousness. But when I talk about diamond Luminosity, I'm trying to describe a particular state of consciousness, a hyper, hyper, clear, clear state of consciousness. And because I know the Buddhist literature better than other spiritual traditions, at least the mystical side of it, I correlate it with what the Buddhists call Dharmakaya, the clear light of absolute reality. It is the foundational metaphysical structure. It is the light out of which the Big Bang emerges and gives birth to the entire physical universe. So it was hyper clear, and so it doesn't have anything to do with physical diamonds, but it does have something to do with what the Diamond Sutra is talking about, and Vajrayana Buddhism is vadra diamond. So it's a diamond, it's a diamond V and there is a cool at least, other structures also talk about this diamond esque Luminosity. But I know it best from reading the Buddhist sources about this reality. And it seems to me that it correlates with what are described in the Tantras in the Vadnais Sutras of the Dharmakaya. Beautiful.

Emmy Vadnais  43:16  
Yeah, there's a question here from Megan Salar, who you've mentioned this a few times about meditation, and she says he talks about the importance of meditation and work outside of this psychedelic work, what does his daily practice look like? Or what would he recommend?

Chris Bache  43:37  
Well, the longer that I worked with psychedelics, the more I appreciated how important it is to have a daily spiritual practice. Because when you go into psychedelics conscientiously, you open your system up to a vast field of consciousness progressively deeper and deeper, larger and larger and and you open yourself up to enormous flows of energy, because I found that each step into a deeper state of consciousness was a step into a higher level of energy. And to stabilize consciousness at that higher level, you have to acclimate to the high level of energy that's involved, which requires intense, hard to describe, but very intense purification processes, which often have the form of fire and solar flares and volcanic just tremendous fire energy to transform your being, so that you can become a being who can live for hours at a time, at that very, very deep level of consciousness where the world works at this level and causal level reality, where it's a it's a different physics. It's a different landscape of consciousness than lower levels of consciousness, where you have, you still have individual. Beings doing individual things and having individual experiences. So when you open up to these deep levels, and then after it's over, you come back into your ordinary consciousness, I find that it's really important to have a daily spiritual practice to anchor you, to help keep your feet solid on the ground, and also because the skills that are acquired in a meditative practice, in Vipassana practice or zazen practice, are precisely the kind of skills of observations and non attachment, which you also use in a psychedelic session, so they reinforce each other structurally. But meditation gives you an environment to assess some of the content, the cognitive content of your temporary sessions, but also it gives you an environment to process the energy which is ignited and set loose in your psychedelic sessions. So that in the chapter on Diamond Luminosity, I talk about my work on integrating Vajrayana practice with my psychedelic practice. And I actually didn't begin the Vajrayana practice until about the same time I was entering the diamond Luminosity, and it was Carol who brought me into the vadrayana tradition, because she did a vadna practice Chud for me on before one of my psychedelic sessions. And the window that opened in that session, this is the 45th session. So I was had a lot of history by that time, but the window that opened was wider, deeper, and it stayed open longer that then had been the case in earlier sessions. So I immediately learned that practice and began to do that practice before any psychedelic session. I would never go into psychedelic space without doing Chud, which is a cleansing it means cutting. It's a cleansing practice. And I found that when I was working at these very, very high energetic levels, it sometimes set in motion processes which are very difficult to integrate processes in my subtle energy system. If you know Alex Gray's work, and you you see how beautiful he depicts the powerful energies that are triggered in deep psychedelic work. After the session is over, they can leave your system feeling quite achy and sort of stretched. And I found that doing Vajrayana practice, doing the Guru Yoga practices, or deity yoga practices, gave that energy a place to run when I was back in my ordinary consciousness, back in my ordinary body. So for lots of reasons, both for clarification of cognitive content, for practicing the teachings that are given to you in your psychedelic sessions, for managing the energetic consequences of entering into those states. I think a daily spiritual practice is really important. And I would mention that before I go, would go into a psychedelic space, I would always you. I would change my psychic my spiritual practice for days and weeks before going into the session, and then I would do different practices coming out of the session. I would be doing kind of soul integration practices after a session, and more cutting clearing practices before the session. So there's a lot of subtlety in in practices. And I would do yoga, I would basically, because I would want my body to be as clear and as possible for would come to these states. And I would also, for example, make sure I get a cut right if I needed to. Because if you're if your body is misaligned structurally or muscularly or emotionally, that's and you amp your energy up, then those blocks are going to be amplified and become problematic. So good personal hygiene, good care of your body, care of your of yoga, care of your mind, meditation, before and after. I think these are all just good hygiene practices, and so my what I do for my daily practice has changed over time. I've been a meditator for a long time, worked in the Vajrayana tradition for a long time. Though, I do find that one of the places, because I'm a talker, because I'm an academic, and because I like to explain things I find teaching is actually has become a spiritual art form for me, because to enter, to try to bring these ideas, spiritual ideas. Make them available to enter into dialog with students day after day, week after week. That requires, or it invites, a kind of a existential posture, a spiritual posture. It's very demanding kind of work if you're really going to engage students at this very deep, existential level. So for me, teaching is is its own form, a very demanding form of spiritual practice.

Emmy Vadnais  50:30  
Yeah, thank you for teaching and sharing with all of us here. I may have asked you in the interview we did, Chris, I don't see any questions at the moment coming through quite the same way. And I know this could be a long answer, but if what, what is it that you felt you learned from these sessions? What is it that yeah, that is so important that you think our viewers and listeners might benefit from Yeah?

Chris Bache  50:57  
You know that that is a large topic. And the challenge of trying to answer that question is doing justice to how many layers of consciousness I went through over this 20 year journey. Many of our important books on psychedelics are based on a much smaller number of sessions, and that tends to create expectations, which shrinks the metaphysical window. So that Aldous Huxley's book, The Doors of Perception, he wrote after only one session, one Mescaline session, and Huston Smith's book, cleansing the doors of perception, where he gathered a lifetime of writing on psychedelics, he had only done LSD six times. And after that, he said the bombers increased, and he decided to take Alan Watts's advice, once you get the message, hang up the phone. But that suggests that the only kind of one or small number of messages that might show up, which may be the case in a couple of sessions. The challenging trying to describe what I learned from it is first trying to describe the many stages of initiation that took place, going from personal to collective, to increase to subtler and causal levels of reality and Non-duality. So a reporter asked me that question one time, and I I made a list of the things which were the highlighted, and I included it in the in the last chapter of the book. And I can't remember all the things now, so I'll just try to approximate my memory. I discovered that underlying all existence is a singular intelligence of unbelievable magnitude, of genius unbelievable intelligence, and that the physical universe is the manifest body of this genius, of this creative intelligence, so that the world that we're living in is the physical body of the Divine. And nothing I'm going to say here is new. It's the cosmology that emerges in psychedelics is essentially the same cosmology that emerges in the great mystical traditions of classical contemplative cultures. So there's nothing new. It's just a different technique, a different trigger protocol for accessing some of these dimensions of consciousness, so that all existence is unified in a fundamental one. Oneness is kind of the one of the core teachings that emerges over and over again. You can enter into oneness so deeply that you enter into a condition that the Buddhas call Shunyata emptiness of self, or anata Nirvana, the self is blown out. And when you are empty of self deeply, you experience the entire world is also empty of cells. And if you experience the world as completely empty of separate individual existences, then within a differentiation of a physical universe, the entire universe lives and breathes us, one, as Plotinus said, so just and you can enter the opportunity to enter into intimacy with this consciousness, to meet it on these special days, and to be engaged by this consciousness and go deeper and deeper and deeper into this consciousness. And so I'll mention, in this context, I knit, I didn't have much contact with individual spirit guides or individual deities or individual forms. My it's. Not that I don't think these things exist. It's just hasn't been my experience, and I think it's partly because of the protocol I used, and because of the qualities of LSD as the psychedelic that it was grinding me up so fine and spreading my dust so deeply into these layers of reality that transcend individual life beings, so that I had many experiences of being at different levels, but not many experiences of individual beings. So part of it is just the loving, the communion that this intelligence is just extraordinary and also this oneness, this being is loving beyond measure. When I have been tapped into the love that this being that brought this being to create and share its existence in this form, the love is overwhelming, and that really surprised me, because I was okay. I was expecting, you know, the creative intelligence to be intelligent, but I was surprised by how much love was present. And so when people talk about love is the primary virtue, I mean, I understand that. I mean that really does. I all learned that our participation in creation is taking place over hundreds of 1000s of years, hundreds of 1000s of years. We that reincarnation is a simple fact of life, and that because reincarnation is a fact of life, we are not time limited in our development, we have to have an understanding. Our spiritual understanding should recognize that it's not what happens in any one particular life which is paramount, and it's not over at the end of any one life, but it's an ongoing progression that takes us back and forth between spirit and matter over and over again, over and over again, in an evolutionary exercise that isn't, I don't think it doesn't culminate in enlightenment. Even the classic vision is you get better and better and clearer and clearer until eventually you achieve realization, you achieve enlightenment. And once you achieve enlightenment, you can leave, you transcend Samsara, the cycles of existence, you can permanently go to some off planet, spiritual paradise. But I don't think that's my least what I've been shown and told is that's not really the project at that's an understandable interpretation from our early experience, when we first made contact, several 1000 years ago, with this profound mother universe, with the spiritual mother universe. It's an understandable Kant In conclusion, because this universe is so beautiful and so ecstatic and and it feels so much like home. Naturally. We think that we want to be there. We belong there. We came from there, and it leads to the religions of return, so that it's all about transcending the limits of human condition and returning to where we came from, where we belong, which generates up and out cosmology. And I think that's a reflection not of the way the world is, but of our early understanding of the world, which is now deepening. Now that we have a better understanding of how huge the universe is and how long it's been in existence, then we if you really want to understand life, you have to begin to think like God. You have to think like a galaxy and understand that the creative intelligence thinks in terms of billions and billions of years. It doesn't think in terms of individuals so much as it thinks of whole species, whole planetary systems, galactic systems. And we have to allow ourselves to expand to understand what is our role in such a universe, and reincarnation allows us to do that. Reincarnation helps us understand not only the tensions that are woven into the body that we have and the mind that we have, but it also weaves us. It gives us an invitation to participate more fully into the divine project, so that the goal becomes to achieve realization, to achieve some deep experiential grounding of our of understanding, our experience of our true essential nature, which is underneath our personality nature. But then once we have that, once we understand that, once we understand that every living thing is grounded in that same reality, that the essence of my individuality is the same as the essence of everybody else's individuality, we're all in this together. Then the goal becomes, I think. To progressively integrate more and more and more spiritual reality into our physical incarnation, so that we can truly bring heaven to earth, that we can truly transform our physical world into a paradise, and not in a metaphorical sense, but I mean in a literal sense, that we eventually will become a species of awakened beings, a species of enlightened beings, a species of saved beings, and a species of enlightened beings creates a different earth than a species of unenlightened beings. So the size of the project, the communion, the opportunity to enter into communion with the project. Reincarnation is true. Reincarnation leads to a different story, a different anthropology, if you will, of the whole creative endeavor.

Chris Bache  1:00:57  
Those are, I guess, some of the highlights of the large ideas that stand out. And as I said, they're not new. These are all well established in our classic mystical

Emmy Vadnais  1:01:09  
traditions, and yet we seem to need to continue to hear them over and over and over again. We do. Some of us, apparently need to.

Jeffrey Mishlove  1:01:19  
I think it may feel like I need to

Chris Bache  1:01:22  
me too, you know? And I think one of the differences, it's sometimes said that the age of individual enlightenment is over now, it's collective enlightenment that is a challenge we face because and I think that's really true. And the 2000 or so years of individual enlightenment or individual salvation, perfectly well understandable. But now, if we don't, if the whole species doesn't awaken, we likely won't be able to survive on this planet. We have to grow up. We have to stop being egoic children, and we have to grow up into our soul consciousness in our deeper spiritual nature, otherwise we're going to lose the planet.

Jeffrey Mishlove  1:02:07  
I have a question from Pablo geralda, who's one of our volunteers. Pablo is in Argentina, and he asks you, Chris, if you have advice for somebody who wants to try psychedelics for the first time, and what are are there legal ways to do it? He's asking. And another viewer, Gracie slick, raises the question, how do you acquire LSD? To my knowledge, it's illegal everywhere in the United States. And so then there's a question of, obviously, there is a market for it, but the question is, how do you know what you're getting

Chris Bache  1:02:51  
absolutely first, and I do not want to encourage people to break the law. I mean, it's just a speaks, be careful here. This is, that I would not want anyone to break the law and get in trouble doing something like this. There are people who want to work with Ayahuasca, and they will go to Peru or to Brazil to work with in Ayahuasca communities and sante Daime or union de vegetal, there are Ayahuasca communities in the United States now which have won the right to use Ayahuasca in spiritual context. They've won the right from the Supreme Court to do this. They are not plentiful, but they are here among the psychedelics. Ketamine is the only one that's legal right now. The MDMA, which is an empathogen, more than a strict psychedelic, but it's important therapeutic instrument, got turned down just last year, but it'll be here. It'll be coming back. It will be made legal, probably within three years, Psilocybin won't be far behind. So what's legal now and what's legal in 10 years will be very different even five years. So the number of psychedelics that one might be able to use is increasing in the years to come. How do you know whether what you've gotten is pure, and that's really an important issue, because you do not want street drugs are filled with all sorts of contaminants that you do not want to put into your system. And you can send these to labs sponsored by the federal government. You can send them anonymously to be tested, and you'll be told what's in them. And so you can check and verify at the state level or the federal level what it is that you've got here, what you're taking and how strong it is. So yeah, and

Emmy Vadnais  1:04:55  
as far as procuring it, no comment or that's up to each person to you. Find a path themselves.

Chris Bache  1:05:01  
Maybe, yeah, no comment, because there you can grow mushrooms. You can learn how to grow mushrooms. I mean, you can create your own Psilocybin mushrooms. And there is, of course, a clear underground throughout the country, which some of them is some of many, much of it is very irresponsible in terms of impurities, and some of the people are very conscientious about this. But still, you have to proceed with caution and always test what you have. Yeah, great.

Emmy Vadnais  1:05:41  
Here's a question from first Deacon Gemini. They ask, what is the difference between ego death and disassociation or de realization both entail detachment and depending on the person, it can feel good, bad or neutral?

Chris Bache  1:05:59  
Yeah. Well, I'm not a psychologist, so take what I say, de realization with a grain of salt here. I understand that to be a psychological experience or condition in which you feel yourself to be dissolving or not grounded in your real or conventional identity, and it is some it's often associated with various forms of psychopathology, because if it becomes endemic, it undermines your capacity to function as a strong individual within the World. Ego Death is sort of similar to that, but different. It's sometimes said you have to have a strong ego for to go through ego death to have a good ego death. Ego Death is basically, let me back up, if you are grounded in the way most people are, in our bodily consciousness, and a consciousness which basically reflects the history of this body in this time reality, if you begin to open up into deeper spiritual realities, then sooner or later, you have to let go of your egoic identity, your body mind identity, to begin to have access to these deeper, broader states where the ego doesn't have a function. In mystical traditions, in classic contemplative traditions, the death of self is well known and recognized. It's usually achieved through a lifestyle of compassion, lifestyle of service, a lifestyle of generosity, prayer, practicing, spiritual practice, contemplative practice. It's a slow, gradual softening of the heart and then opening up to kind of an infusion of divine flux, which is always there. It's always pressing it upon us. We just the ego keeps it out. So if you kind of sacrifice the ego and take it apart through generosity, selflessness, acts of prayer, you're making a transition from a consciousness which is time, space, grounded, bodily, grounded into a consciousness which is more mystical, more open. What happens in a psychedelic session is the same process, but it's accelerated and intensified. If I'm thinking now, I'm a professor of religious studies, so I've always held the spiritual traditions in the back of my mind while I'm doing psychedelic work. And to me, I've always approached psychedelic work as a spiritual practice, even though the goal of my work was kind of different. It wasn't awakening so much as it was cosmological exploration, but basically taking the lessons that we've learned about how to become a more spiritually attuned person from the spiritual traditions, and taking that into the psychedelic context. And in the psychedelic context where you are very powerfully activating deeper levels of awareness, which open up the floodgates, in a way, to this deeper spiritual reality. You reach a point where the ego is put under pressure and it just it just ruptures. You can't contain consciousness within the structure of your ego. And when you get a lot of people, a lot of psychologists, a lot of exercise, a lot of ink and sweat over the complexity and strength and durability of the ego, but from a spiritual perspective, when you get right down to it, it's not that hard to take it apart. You really can. Just break it apart, and when I went through my major ego death experience, the universe just snapped me like a twig. It didn't involve de realization, but it involved a frightening confrontation, because I was turned into something which was the exact opposite of everything I had always known myself to be. I had always known myself to be a man, to be an intellectual, to be white, to be passionately concerned with the meaning of existence. In this critical session, I was turned into the opposite of this. I was turned into women. I was turned into women of color, women who had no philosophical expectations or interests at all, and it was the perfect health for male academic philosopher. It scared the bajibas out of me. And then when I let go and I allowed myself to become these women, then first, I was immediately relaxed, and I was taken under the arm of the Great Mother and taken into an extraordinary journey into the lives of women, into hundreds and hundreds of women. And then after the session was over, as I was coming back, my male identity reasserted itself, and because I like being a man, but I knew that my masculinity and my whiteness and my intellectual would never confine me the way it had confined me before. The problem wasn't of women, of course, or the anti the non intellectual issues. The problem was the tight fit that my social identity had on my consciousness, and that had to be broken. It was as if the universe was saying to me, listen, where you're going. Gender does not exist. Let go. And that's when I let go, and I went into states of consciousness that don't differentiate between male and female, and then eventually going into states of consciousness which don't differentiate between human and non human, right? And then going into states of consciousness which go beyond space and time entirely. So ego death is just that, that kind of rupture which can be slow or fast, depending on what method you're using to let go of your preoccupation with self, you know. The Tibetans call it self clinging, you know. And we can see self clinging when you look at a picture, the group picture, like a class picture, and where does your eye go? Your eye kind of goes quick to where you are in the picture. That's a symptom of self clinging. It's that constant self referencing into your own life experience, which is understandable from one perspective, but so sad from another perspective, right? So it's like if, if you take it, if you think of the ego like an ice cube, and you put an ice cube next to a candle, it melts very slowly, it drips and melts down. And I think this is like what happens in contemplative practice, where you melt this ego slowly. But if you take the same ice cube and you throw it on a hot iron, cast iron skillet, it jumps around and it melts faster, but it explodes and bounces all over the place, and I think that's kind of like how Ego Death manifests itself in psychedelic sessions. So there's not a right way or a wrong way, but the pattern is that we'd have to let go of the confines of these bars that keep us imprisoned in our self referential existence.

Emmy Vadnais  1:13:47  
And do you feel that the ego serves any purpose, since we all seem to have it, or is it just something to be dissolved or eliminated or accepted and then transformed, or however, Yeah, that happens.

Chris Bache  1:14:03  
No, I think ego gets a bad rap in many spiritual traditions. And I think the ego, and by that, I mean our individual identity, our individual body, mind identity. It's a beautiful thing. It's really It's magnificent. And I think it's a cosmologically important thing. I think it's one of the major gifts that we are given by entering into time space. Now, a number of spiritual traditions, again, in the kind of the classic schools, they say, well, the goal is to destroy ego, lose ego, and to return to God. So it's like a drop of water that returns to the ocean. When the drop goes back to the ocean, it doesn't exist anymore. And that's the Vedanta picture, is you basically eliminate ego so that you can live the life divine, but you just live the life divine, no longer as an individual. You just. Surrender completely and become the divine. And I don't think that's an adequate cosmology. I think that, I think that the creative intelligence has created a system which, first of all, we have a life as individual, as an individual, and we we explore and deepen and expand this individual experience lifetime after lifetime after lifetime. And the goal is not to completely abandon our individuality, but the goal is to is to engage what is left out of the individual ego's experience to engage the tremendous power of consciousness, the love that runs through existence, the intelligence that runs through existence, so that you are both an individual, but you are all now transparent to The Divine condition. I don't think individuality is destroyed when you go deeper and deeper. I think it's actually transformed. And I think individuality is truly one of the great gifts of the mother. It's one of the great gifts of time, space, existence. And I think if you study the biographies of the autobiographies are biographies of great spiritual adepts, of great masters. You find that they are individual. You know they're they're quite distinctive individual. So enlightenment is about anata, no self, but it doesn't mean that your individuality is shattered irrevocably and doesn't come back. If that's happening, then that's a kind of a form of psychopathology, even spiritual pathology. I think healthy spiritual maturity is you have individual experience. You have your individual reference point, but you're not imprisoned within that reference point. You build bridges, you you connect and receive this. You you you care about more than just yourself, you care about more than just your species. You care about more than just your generation, and you live large. You're an individual, but you're living a much larger life.

Emmy Vadnais  1:17:13  
Yeah, you know, you recognize the interconnectedness, and perhaps can merge with that, and that really seems to be a definition of yoga is union with the divine, perhaps,

Chris Bache  1:17:24  
yes, yeah, union with the Divine and not dissolving irrevocably so that you don't have an individual awareness or individuality.

Emmy Vadnais  1:17:34  
Yeah. Thank you for all of these answers. Chris and we just want to let our viewers and listeners know that we are over 60 minutes in. We've got about 25 minutes left of the live stream.

Jeffrey Mishlove  1:17:49  
Here's a question from a viewer whose YouTube name is Fabius, who says, How can we reconcile the ideal of transforming Earth into a paradise with the spiritual necessity of contrast and suffering as essential conditions for learning and growth in the human experience.

Chris Bache  1:18:13  
Great question, good question. Now that the question of suffering is a profound question, and that we could take the whole program just to explore that particular topic. I mean, if there is, if the creative intelligence is an intelligence and it's loving, how could we, how could it possibly have tolerated, let alone manifested, a world which is so painful, which which is, which terrible things happen at a very organic level, let alone a social level. And I think in order, in order to really understand and to even have an attempt to comprehend suffering, we have to develop a very long time horizon. We have to look deep into the workings of the universe, and we have to sort of adopt a galactic perspective. And I think this is important to understand that the human species is a radically unfinished species. It's a very incomplete species. And so if you think of all, how young are we? I mean, are we kind of like one to 100 are we 95% finished? Are we 5% finished? You know? And I think we're maybe more like five or 10% finished. We just woke up. I mean, 5000 4000 years ago, we just woke up to this underlying level of consciousness that we've begun to recognize in the true religious traditions. This universe has been building this world for 3.7 billion years, and we're just waking up in this universe and just coming to understand and to engage in it consciously, rather than un. Unconsciously, and the capacities that we see in the highest, most spiritually realized individuals, the capacity of not only compassion, but the capacity to have control over their own physical process, and even the capacity to have to change matter around them to manipulate matter, as some of the great mahasiddhas have the capacity to do. We see in those beings, the symptoms or the qualities that are emerging are emergent qualities in spirit in beings who are integrating more and more spiritual capacity inside this physical body. So if we look to the future and we ask, what is what are we becoming? What is the project? The project is not human beings as they exist in the 21st Century. The project is how human beings will exist in the 23rd 25th 3/30, century, 40th century. And in that context, suffering? Yeah, I don't want to. I don't want to. A lot of people who are listening, who are watching, have suffered greatly in their life. We've all suffered, and some of us have suffered deeply and profoundly in our life, and I do not mean to make light of that in any way, in anything that I would say, but suffering is part of the crucible within which we are learning and on this planet. And suffering has individual roots, sometimes in our individual karma. Of the past, bad choices we've made. But suffering also has collective roots. Sometimes the suffering that we engage in this life is not because of anything that we've done personally, but it's because of where the collective is, where the herd is. It's a suffering which is generated by a common denominator of the of the learning of the human species. We are just in the early stages of really understanding the full power of our nature, of our true and essential nature. And the goal of this access to this deep nature is not simply to be happy and to be relaxed and to be comfortable, but it's literally to transform our experience of being an incarnation of spiritual being, so that the goal is to increasingly change the conditions of our life, so that we are literally living not only a spiritually relaxed and comfortable and good existence, but that we are able we are gradually changing the conditions of our physical existence. I think they'll in the future, we will see we will have more control over our body's diseases and more ability to intervene in the diseases of the body and to produce a healthier and healthier body. I think we'll be seeing all sorts of traits that we consider miraculous becoming increasingly natural and manifest. And I think when we come to this pivot, when we go through the pivot that I think we're coming into. You know, I have a chapter in the book on the birth of the future human I think we have entered a really critical pivot point in the human story. We are being taken into the next level of our human evolution. I think we will see a significant amelioration of our collective suffering. As we make this transition, I think we are going towards a period where individually and collectively, a world of less suffering, a world of greater joy, a world of greater spiritual empowerment and physical ease as we go forward and as we go through this transition, this is just the next iteration of an evolutionary story which has been going on for hundreds, millions of years, millions of years, and will continue to go on for millions, billions of years, four. So in order to understand why we suffer, we have to, if we really want to understand, we have to go very, very deep. We have to go deep into the divine intention. We have to go deep and open up a very, very large vision of history, even if we're going to begin to have a chance of understanding why existence is so hard.

Jeffrey Mishlove  1:24:44  
Well, if I could follow up with a related question, the previous question was sort of the paradox of the necessity of suffering and as compared to the goal of a. Establishing more of a paradise on earth. Another paradox, to me seems to be the idea that you've expressed, that consciousness is fundamental, it's primary, it's it's the foundation of all existence, yeah, and yet it's through a chemical substance that you got there, which would lead a lot of materialists to say, see, it's consciousness is nothing more than a product of chemistry. Yeah.

Chris Bache  1:25:34  
And the same thing happens if you just sit on a meditation cushion for long periods of time and become an increasingly proficient, and in that form, we can now monitor the brain wave patterns, and we can even explore the biochemistry of meditative states of consciousness. And we can say the same thing. See, it's biochemistry and electrical, you know, wave forms in the brain which are actually inducing this. But that really kind of doesn't really solve the problem, does it? Because it that that is the application of a particular metaphysical worldview of materialism. And there, if we want to probe that worldview, we can find lots of counter evidence that will demonstrate that that's an inadequate worldview. It was an adequate worldview in the 18th, 19th century, when we got into it. But it's not an adequate worldview to handle the wide range of experiences that occur in lots of different contexts. Parapsychological research, psychedelic research, different you know, near death, Episode research, reincarnation research, all of that undermine if you're really paying attention the the plausibility of the Metaphysic of the metaphysics of materialism. So but it is an ironic thing that we have this chemical substance which interacts with our body in a way that seems to open us to it opens the floodgates of our Well, see, I tend to think of the mind as kind of more like a transceiver. It is a gate controller, and so it changes the gate structure. It kind of puts our default mode network and allow into quiescence, and it allows us to temporarily have states of awareness that go beyond the default mode network. But it we that kind of mechanism is subject to different interpretations, if we apply a materialist interpretation, or if we bring to it a non materialist, spiritual perspective in which we can understand human existence. The way I understand the human being is that we are living at a synthesis. We are a synthesis of two different systems to be very simply, between a spiritual reality and a physical reality. They are always intertwined. We are. We are living them continuously. If we survive the destruction of our body, it's not because of something that happens to us when we die. It's because of something that we already are. We already are living with one foot in two worlds, and we know that if we shift the balance, we can open ourselves to that spiritual dimension without leaving our physical body. And we can do it through any number of different contemplative practices and yogic practices. We can also do it using Soma, using some of the ancient sacred medicines in the tradition that doesn't prove materialism, it just proves, again, if we start with a model that we are a synthesis of two metaphysical systems, then we can explain all the phenomena and more of the phenomena than materialism can explain.

Emmy Vadnais  1:28:58  
Yeah, here's a question from my husband, Xander, and as humans, we have a sensory system and a motor system through which you mentioned it with the brain, that's the central nervous system, and some refer to that as being a filter of consciousness. And he asks, If you had synesthetic experiences, what sense our senses were most active, so synesthesia, where maybe you like hear smells, or, yeah, based vision, or

Chris Bache  1:29:30  
no, I'm not in a good position to answer that question. I'm afraid Xander, I just because those kind of experiences are not, are not, do not figure largely in my experience. So I haven't thought about them a lot. I haven't studied them very much. I don't when I've taken psychedelics, I don't hallucinate on them. I mean, I'm always wrapped up with eye shades and whatnot. But even when I've taken the eye shades off, I don't. Have visual distortions in my world around me. If I had stayed in touch with physical reality, I'm sure I would have, and then I might have had some of the experiences you're referring to. But if you internalize your experience completely, you engage conscious reality, and then you're on a conscious experience. And I see many things, and I experience many things, but I don't experience them as kind of a permutation or distortion of my physical sensation. It's kind of like I just let go of physical sensation and I just plunge into the conscious, the tunnel of consciousness, and go there. Now I'm sure there's a good answer to your question, and I'm sure people, maybe even people on this podcast right now, who would be able to give you a good answer to that question. I'm just afraid I'm not one of them.

Emmy Vadnais  1:30:57  
Well, I think he's had those experiences, and that's why he was curious if that's something you you had also experienced.

Chris Bache  1:31:05  
Yeah, yeah. The permeability between our senses shows up in several different contexts. I know it shows up in shamanic drumming, for example. The different fluidity there we are such a complex being this blending of spirit and matter, it shows up at very broad levels, and it shows up at very micro levels in our sensation.

Jeffrey Mishlove  1:31:32  
Here's a question from a viewer named Corey Burdick, who asks, what are some of the most powerful or inspiring examples of the emergence of the new human.

Chris Bache  1:31:52  
Well, I think when we see somebody who's willing to lay down his life for others, that's an extraordinary example when we see people who spend their entire life working to help other people, and they they they bypass putting their energy towards enhancing their life, and they invest all their energy in helping other people live a full, enriched life. Those are symptoms of the of the future human, the way I understand the future human, I'll step aside for just a second and come back to the focus. We've been incarnating for 1000s and 1000s, hundreds of 1000s of years. We've been incarnating and the pattern in our religious structures have sort of seen a linear development in our reincarnation. We go backwards, you go forward. But basically making a linear development, it in so that we become eventually more compassionate, more intelligent, more creative, so on so forth. But I think at least as it's as it's been shown to me, and as I've been taken into it, I think we are coming to a time of history in general, and people individually where, well, let me just say how it happened to me. I reached a point in one of my sessions when all of my former lives started coming into me, and I had done years of past life, therapy work, so I was familiar with some of my former lives, but they began to come into me. I could feel them entering me. And it was like wrapping a filament of white light around a kite spool. And after a certain period, they seemed to fuse. And when they fuse, there was a tremendous explosion of energy, and I was catapulted into a state of consciousness in which I was an individual, but I was an individual beyond any frame of reference that I had known before. And this is what I came to call the birth of the diamond soul, or the birth of the soul. And then I was given a series of teachings that was explaining what happened, what was happening. And I think I was being shown that this is what happens to a species that reincarnates. As we reincarnate, we come to a point where there's a long period of individual development, of linear development, but there comes a point where it's just natural that all of our former lives achieve a synthesis of the soul. Now this synthesis exists in spiritual reality. When we die, we return to soul consciousness. We return to the consciousness that holds all of our former lives. And then we incarnate, we get narrow, we die, we get large, we incarnate, we get lateral. And if we keep this up for a few 1000s of years, sooner or later, doesn't it make sense that the soul, the whole soul, the 100,000 year old being, incarnates in a physical incarnation, so that the kind. Consciousness that lives in that body is not a consciousness that ever is tempted to think of him or herself as 100 year old being, but it's it's natural consciousness as aware that is an ancient being, and it has ancient relationships with all these beings. It has been male, female, rich, poor, black, white, every possible permutation, all of those live within us, but when they achieve a synthesis, when they become one, then there is this explosion of identity. And I think that this is what is happening to the planet right now. We are undergoing a spiritual process, where we are transitioning from egoic identity to soul identity. We are growing up out of our childish, egoic past into a mature self where we are we are learning to we are basically becoming incarnate diamond souls. And I think we can see this in some of the great spiritual masters of history, that they are different from ordinary people and but the difference is that they are bigger, older, deeper. They are distillations of the soul. So what are the, what are the symptoms of, I think, the soul emerging in history. It doesn't happen like all at once, or something dramatic. It happens gradually and slowly in different all sorts of different ways. And so the symptoms are when you see people who take the long view, who really see the seven generations. Consider the seven generations of impact of one's actions when you have the wide view, when they are naturally their compassion expands, extends to whole classes of people. When we see the Gandhi's of the world, or the Martin Luther Kings of the world, people who live their lives in service of other people, trying to lift other people, help other people along. You see it in the in the music teacher who's teaching fifth graders, year after year after year, sharing his or her musical knowledge to give that musical knowledge to others so that they can reach their life and go forward. So I think we see the symptoms of an older soul or the new human, when we see symptoms of great compassion, great vision, great service, selflessness and we can see, we can recognize those around us without necessarily understanding what we are, what We were seeing, what we're seeing is the soul emerging in that in that life form, in that life being, and I think that we are coming to a time in history where we have to grow up into the soul's consciousness, and just there's a synergistic relationship as the world is trying to become one To solve the problems which has generated the soul is trying to become one, and because we have the history of the world inside our soul as the World Challenge basically deals with all the ways it's divided life into bits and pieces and preferring some people and discouraging other people, we have all these tensions inside of us, and so that there's a synergistic relationship between us trying to become one and whole within ourselves and the world trying to become one and whole. And I think we are being guided into the transformation, which will not be easy. I think it's going to be very painful where we're going, but we are coming into labor. We've been gestating the future human for hundreds of 1000s of years. Gestation is long, labor is short. And I think we're coming into labor. We have to deliver the soul into history. We have to grow up. And I think we will. I mean, I think we will make this transition. A lot of serious people think that we won't, that it's we're in a we are an extinct species. We're just living on borrowed time. But my experience is that we do make this transition, we will make it. It will be very painful, but we will give birth to the soul in history. I Well,

Jeffrey Mishlove  1:39:23  
that's beautifully put, and it's probably a good note to close our live stream on Chris, it's been a real joy to be with you. Emmy. Do you have any concluding thoughts?

Emmy Vadnais  1:39:39  
I just want to say thank you for the hope and inspiration, and it sounds like you possibly were given precognitive information in your LSD sessions, and that you have some type of wisdom or knowledge, not only for yourself, but also for the collective and because you're right, there are a lot of people. Who feel like we might be devolving and things are going really south. I'm not thrilled to hear about the pain coming up, but hopefully we can take some of these spiritual practices and maybe ameliorate some of that.

Chris Bache  1:40:15  
I think we can. I think we can either go through this kicking and screaming and hurting a lot, or we can go through it being more proactive, with more foresight, and in a cooperative relationship with what's coming. And what I've been describing is nothing unique to me. It's these ideas about the transition comes up in indigenous peoples tradition. It comes up in the lives of mystics and meditators. So, you know, it comes up in those who work in deep Jungian, you know, type of psychotherapy, there's nothing unique to my perception. There's nothing really unique to psychedelics about it. It's just that I think there are precognitive aspects to this type of work, which is when you let go of your personal identity, you open to the life of your species. And just as you can have insights into your personal trajectory, you can also have true insights into this trajectory of your species. It's just a very natural thing. And many people have had these insights. Many people see we're coming into and I think we will make it. I think my concern is how many of our children will die before we make it well.

Emmy Vadnais  1:41:30  
And it's nice to hear more people such as yourself bring these insights. So the more spiritually evolved people we have it sounds like the better, which is perhaps one of the main reasons we continue to do these programs on new thinking allowed.

Chris Bache  1:41:47  
I think there are many Bodhisattvas in the world, including the people behind this program, working on behalf of the good of the whole that's the essence of the Bodhisattva. And there are many with us now today.

Jeffrey Mishlove  1:42:00  
Well, once again, Chris, thank you so much for being with Emmy and I and with the new thinking allowed audience today and Emmy, thank you once again for the wonderful job you do as co host on new thinking allowed. I'd like to remind our viewers that you can subscribe for free to our weekly newsletter you can download for free the first eight issues of the new thinking allowed magazine, and we hope that you continue to enjoy the videos that We post daily on the new thinking allowed channel,

Emmy Vadnais  1:42:43  
thank you so much for being with us. Chris,

Chris Bache  1:42:45  
no, thank both of you for this wonderful conversation. I enjoyed it very much. Thank you for your work,

Emmy Vadnais  1:42:50  
our pleasure, and for those of you watching or listening, thank you for being with us because you are the reason that we are here. You.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
