Manda Scott  0:04  
Chris, welcome to the accidental goals podcast. How are you and where are you? This slightly gray December day over here, but it might be lovely where you are.

Chris Bache  0:15  
Hi, Amanda. It's pleasure to be here with you. I'm speaking to you from Weaverville, North Carolina, which is just outside of Asheville, North Carolina, and it's a sunny day here. It's going to be in a lovely afternoon in the mid 40s. Wow.

Manda Scott  0:31  
Okay, now I have weather envy, but, but hey, you're in a swing state, which at some point we might get onto. That must have been quite entertaining for a brief period of time. Let's not go there. That's two pages. All right. So you've written a number of books, you've had a very inspiring life, and my projection onto you, which I am almost certain is not true, is that you have the answers to life, the universe and everything. So we'll lay that one to bed as it's my projection, and you don't see it that way, just so it's clear we're there. And from where you are, what is most alive for you at this inflection point of humanity?

Chris Bache  1:11  
Well, we've just gone through an election in our country, which was for the liberal side of the continent like me, was very disappointing and very upsetting what's happening in politics, in my country and in many countries around the world, this whole movement to the conservative right is very much of concern, especially since they are denying fundamental facts that are clearly critically important for humanity To address. First and foremost is the fact of global climate change. And yeah, so that's happening. And in my book, LSD, in the mind of the universe, I have a whole chapter on what I call the birth of the future human, which summarizes all the transmissions that were given to me over a 20 year course of high dose LSD sessions about humanity's future, where we are in our evolutionary development, the critical crisis that we are moving into, the birth of of a new form of humanity coming out of that crisis. So when I and a great future for humanity, but for deep, spiritualized realization to emerge in humanity, there must take place, first, a dark night of the soul, a collective dark night of the soul. So I see what's happening politically against that backdrop of a growing dismantling of assumptions, a growing unraveling of our social contracts, and a growing global crisis, which seems to be generated by seems to be generating by a series of eco crises.

Manda Scott  3:05  
Okay, so that gives us an opening into the birth of the future human. For those watching on YouTube, my cat is on the desk. It's easier to let him just ramble across, and then he'll go away and it'll be fine before we go there. So it seems to me, let's just address the politics, because it's a lie for everyone. This is going out at the start of the new year 2025. Is going to be the year when everything changes. America sneezes, the world gets a cold, and nothing will be the same, particularly not geopolitics is about to shift enormously. I think a US Russian Alliance has never happened before, and it looks like it's arising in real time. And it seems to me, 71 million people voted vote for Trump. That means, by my reckoning, 259 million didn't. And yet there's been effectively a bloodless coup by the fascist right. And yet no amount of ideology, however forcefully they try to impose it can actually overcome biophysical reality. You cannot stop climate change by pretending it's not happening. The ostrich position is only useful until the flood waters fill the hole that you've stuck your head in. Yeah. So it seems almost to me that also to me, that the shifts that we need, need to be inner and collectively inner, which is exactly the field that you're working in. Yeah, and we don't want to go back over everything that you experienced, but I wonder if you've got a kind of an elevator pitch of where you started and where it took you to in terms of your own spiritual process is that something that we could go into sure

Chris Bache  4:44  
I can give you a kind of a quick overview. I began my psychedelic work when I was just hired as a university professor in Northeast Ohio, and I began this work as a pretty well educated. Dedicated agnostic with strong atheistic inclinations. That's where all the years of graduate school had brought me. But just when I started teaching, I came across the work of Stanislav Grof and his book, realms of the human unconscious, changed the direction of my life. I saw the importance of his work from my discipline, which was philosophy of religion. I'm not a psychologist, I'm not a therapist, I'm a professor of philosophy of religion. And so I began an underground regimen of psychedelic therapy because I knew that in order to speak intelligently using this new methodology, you had to do the work yourself. And even though it was illegal by this time, this was 1978 when I started my career, I started my psychedelic work in 1979 psychedelics were illegal. I made a decision to do this work in underground fashion, completely isolated. My never let my students and most of my faculty never knew what I was doing. In this regard, I continue this work for 20 years. I started it when I was 30, and I finished it when I was 50, and I did 79 high dose LSD sessions, which is an a very aggressive protocol. I don't recommend this protocol today.

Manda Scott  6:24  
You did this so we don't have to, as far as I can see, and I'm enormously grateful.

Chris Bache  6:29  
Yeah. And then I spent another 20 years digesting those experiences, writing about them, integrating them, trying to integrate them, and written two books based on those experiences. One of them is dark night, early dawn, which came out in 2000 and probably the more important one for a wide audience, is LSD in the mind of the universe, which came out in 2019 so I did this work for 20 years, and then LSD in the mind of the universe came out 20 years later, after I stopped,

Manda Scott  7:05  
after you'd integrated a lot of what happened, and after you were also, it seems, from the book, just beginning to be able to start talking about it, because you had issues where you couldn't speak. You physically couldn't speak, because he couldn't speak of what you understood and what you knew. Can you tell us a little bit about that that seemed to me quite an integral part of what was happening?

Chris Bache  7:26  
Well, I love teaching, I love working with the students. I just really love being in the classroom. And I knew that if I began to speak openly about psychedelics in the 70s, 80s, 90s, even, I very likely would lose my perfect my position at the University, and so I could not speak openly about my work. I mean, I really I spoke indirectly by giving teaching courses on psychedelic therapy and Stan Grof work and other people's research. But like I didn't, wasn't able to own my experiences publicly at my university until the very, very tail end of my career, I retired in 2011 in order, a little bit early, in order to give me time to bring forward what I consider my most important work, and my conviction is that psychedelics represents a revolution, not just in therapy, not just a clinical revolution, but a revolution in how we do philosophy and this methodology is that we move systematically into very carefully controlled Non-ordinary states. We experience them as consciously as we can. We bring them back, preserve them, write a detailed written account within 24 hours, and then spend some time digesting them, integrating them with our other bodies of knowledge, then going back into that state and coming in. So this method of systematically entering into Non-ordinary states and coming back represents a new methodological platform for the doing of philosophy. So what we're looking at is what the emergence of what I would call a psychedelic philosophy, the psychedelic that's grounded on the systematic application of Non-ordinary states of consciousness through the use of psychedelics.

Manda Scott  9:19  
Yeah, can I interrupt you, because this is already opening doors, and I'd like to go down a few of them. So we're talking about integrating with other systems. And in the book, you are becoming quite deeply involved in some Buddhist practices. Were they Buddhist, I think. And so it strikes me, within the shamanic world, we get a lot of people who want to go off and do Ayahuasca or do mushrooms. And it seems to me there it's short cutting and not universally. I have spoken to people who are absolutely prepared to go and spend six months in the forest alone with the plants and integrate it, but there are an equal number of people who seem to think they can go from point A to point. Ed without actually doing any of the steps in between. And what I'm think, I'm hearing from you is that the steps in between are absolutely crucial and that they need to be undertaken in a structured fashion, in in spite of the fact that it we feel to me, to be moving away from the reductive, scientific space where atoms move around like billiard balls, and everything is predictable, as long as we have enough data points to a point of where everything is emergent and complex and actually nothing is predictable, but experience, the phenomenology of living, is what matters, and the more than human world comes in and takes part, it seemed to me, reading, certainly the second book, to an extent the first, but particularly in the second, that there was an extraordinary coherence. You had a six year gap in the middle, and yet when you when you went back, you basically took off. It was like a serial Dream, which those of us who practice dreaming you sometimes night after night after night after night, you're in the same story. And you were getting this. You were in an almost linear progression, except it was more fractal than linear, I would say, you building on previous knowledge, and you were being taught quite clearly. And so can you unpick for us a bit of the structure that you see that is useful in order for this to be something that helps us move towards being future humans.

Chris Bache  11:29  
Okay, well, there several things rolled into your observations and all good. They're all good observations. So some process comments. First, I think integration is very important. We're finding we have the technology, the chemical technology, to trigger very deep states of consciousness, but these states of consciousness may have very little lasting impact on how our deeply ingrained psychological cultural habits, if we don't take time to sit with these experiences and integrate them as deeply as we can into our embodied existence. And over the course of my work, I learned that even though I was paying a lot of attention and doing as good a job as I could to integrate each individual session and doing an adequate job. I think I still underestimated the long term challenges of integrating an entire spiritual journey, but I did not fully comprehend this until I had stopped my journey at the end and then realized how hard the stopping hit me, which then exposed the the imbalance, the failure to integrate the radical, the most extreme, most radical experiences, which were the deepest experiences, being drawn into intimacy, into communion With, I want to say the divine, but I'm cautious about that, because we have to unpack all sorts of theological, you know,

Manda Scott  13:08  
distortion on this podcast, actually, you could we talk about the heart, mind of the universe all the time, which I think is, is, for me, what you would call the divine. So I think we can assume that unpacking has been done in the past five years.

Chris Bache  13:20  
The universe is good. I like. That's why the book is called LSD. In the mind of the universe, it could be the heart mind of the universe,

Manda Scott  13:26  
but you came to a point where you were basically marking time, waiting to die in order to return to Unity with the divine. Yes, did I understand that correctly?

Chris Bache  13:36  
No, you understood. You got it correctly. It's kind of jumping ahead to the story. Let me back up and work to that point. Okay, if you work, and I think in order to extract the maximal psychological, psycho, spiritual and philosophical value of these experiences, it's very important to create a container, what I call the Kiva of practice, a container which affords you the best opportunity for absolutely clear contact with these deeper states of consciousness, without interruption, without confusion, no outside contact. You're in a therapeutic environment. You're lying down, you're with a skilled sitter. You're listening to carefully curated music. It's a it's a complex process, which you have to prepare for. You have the session you need. You're integrating the session acutely for several days after. So each session takes a week, essentially, to, you know, just for the immediate session, and then as you build on these sessions over time, you're right. It's a linear, I found a linear progression. Relatively speaking. You know, consciousness is a holistic phenomenon. So you may experience multiple levels of consciousness simultaneously. You may experience some deep levels. Of consciousness early in your journey work, but if you work systematically, my experience at least, is that there was a progressive deepening, so that I went through rounds of deepening when I was writing up my journey at the very end, I looked at the total landscape of my experiences, and I broke it down into five fundamental landscapes that I had been exploring. One is personal mind, your personal unconscious. Second is the collective mind, the species mind Carl Jung would have called the collective psyche. Third, archetypal mind. Fourth, causal mind, the mind of oneness. And fifth, the diamond Luminosity. So my experience was I would work. I would go through success of success, succession of death and rebirth experiences. Eventually I would have a breakthrough that would catapult me into a new level of consciousness where I would have to learn how it worked. It was a totally different it was like a different physics governing this level of reality. I would work there. I would continue to learn there. But in that process, I would go through more purification exercises, more episodes of death and rebirth that weren't simply repeating ego death, but were taking me into a deeper cycle of death and rebirth. And eventually that would culminate, and it would I would have a breakthrough into a completely different level of reality, and that level of reality, I would all start over again. I wouldn't understand how it would work. It would be confusing. Then I would keep going back to it. I'd get my sea legs. I would acclimate to it. My visionary experience would get clear. And then I would go and get propelled into another level of reality. And when I was in the middle of the deepest, deepest level. I went into the diamond Luminosity. I had an experience in which I was I had an experience of a level of Light Beyond the diamond Luminosity, and a ray of light came out of that reality hit me, shattered me, and what it taught me was it's an infinite progression. It I had thought in the beginning it was a matter of becoming one with God or getting to the meta, cosmic void stage of work. But what I found is that there are many, many levels of God. There are many levels even of the primal void. That's an infinite progression. You'll never reach the end to of it, even using as powerful a protocol as high dose LSD work, and that really is one of the things that shifted my entire orientation, because if I were doing it over again, I would be much gentler with myself. I would use lower doses. I would balance and vary the psychedelic that I was using, because I've learned that the goal of the work is not to get to some end stage or end point, which would, you, know, change your life forever, but the goal is simply to open, let as much of the wisdom of the universe in as possible, as much of the love as much of the insight, and then spend weeks, months, years, integrating that those experiences changing whatever it is about your life that is keeping you from experiencing those realities on everyday, daily basis, and then continuing work. So at the end of my journey I had I found that I had gone so deep into intimacy with the divine, into the Divine Light, dissolving completely into fields of light, transcending space and time, so deeply that when I stopped this work and and I'll go later if you want to why I stopped the work, but I stopped it after 20 years, and then in the years following, I found that I was missing the transcendent clarity so deeply that I found I was just waiting to die so that I could return when I died, and after reflecting on this for a long period of time, I began to realize something's not right. This is not the way this work is supposed to end. It's not healthy. And I spent a lot of time then studying my work to try to find out where I had gone wrong. And I realized, I came to realize that I had I had gone so deeply into Transcendence that I had created an imbalance within my incarnation, an imbalance which was tilted towards Transcendence at the expense of embodied affirming my deeply physical, embodied existence. And both of the these are two fundamental truths. We are always tapped into Transcendence. We're always tapped into the physical world. But I had tilted the balance very far, and I had to make a conscious choice to reground myself in physical reality so that I could become more comfortable. In my own skin, and this began, and writing LSD in the mind of the universe was a tremendous help, because I was speaking about my experiences. And I'm an academic, and I, you know, I love to talk, so I love to teach, and by speaking about these experiences, it empowered my integrating the experiences, and by sharing them publicly, after so many years of keeping them private, it allowed a healing to take place inside my own psyche, between that which had been hidden and That which had been public between the higher and that, which is, quote, lower or the Earth year. Yeah, yeah.

Manda Scott  21:09  
Again, many doors opened. We want to come back to why you ended. I would like to make clear to people listening. First of all, this was industrial doses of LSD, and you've explained that you went through death and rebirth experiences. I think it's worth pointing out that there were points where you were vomiting so hard for so long that the vessels in your eyeballs ruptured. Yeah, it wasn't sounding like a whole lot of fun to me. And you also had your then wife, who was a trained psychologist, psychotherapist, I can't remember, but she was very good at holding the space, so you had a lot of anchoring. And it still sounds like the early part of every single journey was living hell, as far as I can tell. Would that be fair?

Chris Bache  21:53  
Yeah, it's, it's what I discovered eventually, that there's a purification cycle, and early, traditionally, we would call it the Death-Rebirth cycle. But we often think of death as something that happens to us one time, and a lot of the therapeutic literature and psychedelic work circles focuses on ego death, which is for me, is only the first round. And what I learned later, after you've died many times in this process, I mean completely loss of control, metaphysical confusion, just complete surrender to overwhelming, metaphysical waterfalls. You learn that first you cannot die. It's impossible to die. The form that you are can die. The structure of life as you have known it can be extinguished, but the inner essence of your being always re emerges. The Phoenix always rises. And I in that process, I also learned that death, what we experience as death, is actually an extremely intense form of purification. When your purification reaches so deeply that it reaches into the fundamental assumptions that structure your experience of reality, then death has returned to grace you, right? So it's purification breakthrough experiencing a deeper state, and if you want to stop at that level, it's perfectly fine. Different people use different psychedelics, different modalities at different powers, and some psychedelics only have sufficient power to reach certain levels. Happened that the method that I was using, the substance I was using, was so powerful, it had the power to keep breaking me through level after level in this systematic fashion. Yeah.

Manda Scott  23:48  
And did you choose LSD because of Stan Grof and and it was the thing back in the 70s at that I suppose that's a head mind question, but my spirit mind question is, you could have done a lot of different things. Ayahuasca wasn't around much, but mushrooms were there were other things that were there. Do you think that whatever it is that guides you through this incarnation led you to that because you said you wouldn't do it again now, but you wouldn't be who you are now if you hadn't gone through the Erdogan, the military, the military version of completely destroying yourself many times. Can you speak to that?

Chris Bache  24:26  
Well, to understand why I chose LSD, you have to go back to 1979 1980 Ayahuasca was still not yet on the playing field for the most part. Just early mushrooms certainly were. I understood LSD to be more powerful than mushrooms. So the primary reason, though, is that my work was based upon Stan Grof work, and I trusted Stan. I trusted his research, and Stan did most of his work with LSD. So that's where I dug in. I dug in there. Later. After I finished my 20 year journey, I've done many psychedelics. I've done mushrooms and five MEO and salvia divinorum and San Pedro, different psychedelics in Ayahuasca, which are beautiful, and they've taught me a lot, and I have a certain sense of that each of these psychedelics impact the spectrum of consciousness, or open some portion of the spectrum of consciousness. The the kind of contact I experience with Psilocybin, for example, is very body grounded, very emotional. Body grounded. LSD tends to be have a high cosmological ceiling tendency, certainly at high doses, it tends to push the high ceiling, whereas Psilocybin is much more grounded earthy in my earthly existence.

Manda Scott  25:54  
Yeah, and it's seems to me, it's more to do with opening doors into the rest of the web of life, rather than necessarily cosmic awareness. Not that the two are mutually exclusive, but there's, as you were saying, there's a tilt one way or the other tilt. Yeah, I want to move towards the future human. But just before we go there, I'm wondering how was it taken in academic circles when you wrote these books? Were there people who then came to and went, Yes, I've been wanting to do this, or I have been doing this, and thank you for opening the doors. Or were there others for whom the door was now shut and you your access was denied? How did it land with your people?

Chris Bache  26:33  
My work has been well received in the consciousness community and in the academic community. They don't even know I exist. For the most part, it's been ignored. There hasn't been a single professional review published of my work out of a hardcore academic philosophy journal or religious studies journal.

Manda Scott  26:56  
But you must have friends who could publish in those journals. You must have ways into that if, if people wanted to, is it just not worth their career to do that?

Chris Bache  27:07  
You know, I just one of the things I decided early on in my career was not to try to address the reservations which were abundantly clear to me coming out of the traditional academic mindset. I decided that if I tried to justify the method and justify the experiences to my colleagues, it would it would hamper me, it would hold me back. I just decided to push deeply ahead and let the chips fall where they may and and I understand how exotic, how strange my claims are, how they sound to people, right? You know, raised educated in a traditional environment, and I've just decided to let that go and let history sort things out. I am acutely aware that I'm writing not from my present generation. I'm writing for my for future generations. Who will, you know, paradigm change take place in evolutionary context, and so I'm just doing the work and letting other people sort out what they think it's worth and with any

Manda Scott  28:19  
luck, I already give my it to be one of your students and it sounds like there are, particularly we touched on the earlier moments when you were having what we would now consider to be psychic experiences where you knew things that from non ordinary reality, not when you're on the LSD, but just when you were teaching and then, and then you had to hold them in, because if you said something, It was basically going to blow everybody's fuses. And there fuses, and they were going to wonder how you knew it and explain how you knew it. But those students I am thinking, have been in the in the field of your awareness, at a point when you are experiencing, I've begun to see the world in a different space. So with any luck, they'll go off and change the world.

Chris Bache  29:03  
So I'll tell you one aspect about that particular I never let my students know that I was doing this work, but I began to find that even though they didn't know about my psychedelic work, they began to have experiences which were moving, showing that they were being impacted by my psychedelic work. And secondly, my work was changing me at a deep structural level, so that my person became a lightning rod that was sparking transformational insights or breakthroughs among my students without me consciously intending it. I began when I would be lecturing. I was drawing into my lecture examples which were purely random for me, but the examples I was being told were actually exactly the same thing that had been happening to my students that week, and the thing. Things I was saying began to touch them in very, very deep, personal, intimate places, places they were wounded, places they were blocked from going forward. This became such a common feature of my work that eventually I spent a lot of time studying this and developing an entirely new way of teaching to take into account the truths that I was discovering in the classroom and in my psychedelic work that revolved around the boundaryless nature of consciousness. Fields of consciousness that fields develop in groups, there's an energetic resonance which happens underneath the verbal exchange of ideas as a consciousness, directly engaging consciousness. And so I published a book in 2008 after I stopped my sessions called the living classroom in which I lay it all out. But I never mentioned psychedelics, because the issue is not psychedelics. The issue is consciousness, the potential of consciousness. So if you do very deep consciousness work without psychedelics, I think you can trigger the same things that I experienced. But eventually, just recently this actually, this month, SUNY press is bringing out a second edition of the living classroom, and in this edition, they invited me to tell the truth about my psychedelic practice, because I'm out of the closet by now. LSD, in the mind of the universe was out. So the new edition of the living classroom makes clear that it was my psychedelic practice that was driving the phenomena that were emerging in my classes, even though I think other people not using psychedelics can experience the same thing, so that's that's a whole nother, another aspect that has to do with integration. Because integration here means taking care, not only of yourself, but taking care of anyone whom your practice touches, which for me, included many of my students, and 1/3 of the book is just essays that my students have written, very deep essays, personal essays about their own spiritual experiences, their experience of death. It's that's a beautiful section of the book,

Manda Scott  32:16  
right? I will find that and put a link in the show notes. And you were still teaching the philosophy of religion at this point you hadn't branched out into other things. Is that?

Chris Bache  32:25  
Right? Yeah, I was teaching classically Religious Studies courses, Introduction to world religions, Eastern religions, Buddhism, psychology of religion, mysticism and meditation. You know, classic curriculum.

Manda Scott  32:39  
Gosh, I wish they were the classic curriculum when I went through but with my my senior apprentice. And I don't work with psychedelics, but we work, we teach shamanic studies. And I found, even when I'm talking about the book in front of a literary festival, that's that basically full of ordinary middle class people who've come along and had nothing better to do, and wanted to get out of the rain, as far as I can tell. And we end up drawing in examples that seem to come out of nowhere. And then someone goes, Oh, you just mentioned Boston, and something about streets in Boston, about which I know precisely nothing. I come from Boston, and the streets are just like that. So so I'm sure that what you said is absolutely true and and at a deeper level when we're teaching a held circle, then then the resonances move across the circle, but becoming aware of these such that everyone in the circle is engaging with that strikes me as a step towards future humanism, if we're I think we're becoming conscious of the things that can help us to be different humans.

Chris Bache  33:42  
Once you understand how fields work, and once you develop a protocol that maximizes potential of the emergence of conscious of these consciousness changing fields within groups, then you you do it in a way that accelerates. It deepens not only the learning experience, but it accelerates the transformational value of these exercises for everyone involved. And this applies not just to university courses. It applies in research laboratories, in boardrooms, wherever citizens gather in sustained conversations, which is where most of our change takes place, in dialog with other human beings. And so this is very relevant to the challenge moving into, yeah,

Manda Scott  34:30  
yes, so let's go there. So let's lay out where I think roughly we're at. And you can tell me, because you live in the US, and I'm just watching it with kind of squinched up eyes from across the water waiting for it to come over here. Musk has already said he's going to basically buy the next election, and we have always had the best democracy money could buy. So unless we can change the democratic process, that's it. So Moscow and Starlink, I've been floating across substack watching something. Very interesting, very geeky people pointing out how he managed to steal the election and how the numbers don't add up. But you know, if you're going to feed everything through Starlink, the person who owns the Starlink can make it say what they want it to say. You and I are talking across many 1000s of miles using technology that, in the end, is basically owned by an individual who might be very interesting, but I don't necessarily want them knowing everything that I think can do. So it seems to me that evolution only happens under moments of intense pressure. I would like this moment not to become any more intensely pressurized. Probably will, but yeah, this is as much as I ever want. Therefore, can we evolve our consciousness to become future humans. And it seems to me that you have a doorway and a framework and a concept within which that could happen. Does that? How does that land with you?

Chris Bache  35:54  
That all aligns fine, and I think you're absolutely correct. I'm not sure that I have a doorway that I would recommend as such, but I do think that psychedelics have entered our historical scene at precisely a time when we need more awareness. We need it for therapeutic, prosperous processes. We need it for political processes. We need to wake up and grow. And so I think it's historically important. And there are 1000s and 1000s of people working conscientiously, not superficially, but very conscientiously, working with psychedelics in order to heal the accumulated trauma of many lifetimes and to open up a deeper communion with the intelligence that's resides within the universe to help us make a transition from a mechanical, Dead universe of dead matter to a living universe that's alive at its core, that's expressing its intentionality through the quantum jumps that take place in our evolutionary journey. And I think we are coming into a quantum jump right now, in a nutshell. Well, let me back up a sec. This chapter, the birth of the future human, and everything that it contains is completely came into my work by complete surprise. I thought of myself doing the work I was doing for personal transformation, personal healing, maybe even personal enlightenment. But what happened is that the method was so powerful it pushed beyond all those categories, and I had to reframe my understanding of the boundaries of conscientious psychedelic work in a way that dropped the model of personal transformation and opened up into a model of collective transformation. I had years and years of experiences where the shadow that I was engaging was not my personal shadow. I did that work, but this was a collective shadow. The pain and the excruciating suffering that I was processing had to do with the pain of my entire species. And there that I came to understand that there is a collective psyche that that holds the trauma of humanity's history, just as our individual psyche holds the trauma of our individual history, and this collective trauma and collective pain encumbers the free functioning of the collective psyche, just as our individual trauma encumbers our individual health and well being. So by doing this work, I began to understand that something in the universe was using my sessions to make a small contribution to healing the collective psyche in order to make it more available to the influx of energy from divine consciousness to allow it to manifest more completely in humanity.

Manda Scott  39:09  
Now that that bit, can you just say that again? Because I think that's really important. It's not that it's that opening of the door to something that's trying to come in. Is that what I just heard you say, can you just repeat that? Because I think that needs emphasizing.

Chris Bache  39:25  
I think we're living at a time of ascending spiritual energy. There's, it's almost like there's an influx of higher light energy, spiritual energy, pushing in on us and our the pain of our history, the karma of our narrowness of our smallness of our trying to live within a framework of individual ego, at cost of anyone else's well being, keeps us locked away unsen insensitive to this incoming light and as. In any mystical development before there is a breakthrough into non dual or unitive consciousness, there is a dark night of the soul where you have to undo, you have to let go of all of the obstacles, all the blocks. And I think this is happening at a collective level, not only inside intense psychedelic sessions, but everywhere. If you're doing past life therapy, many of the lives that come up to be cleansed or not necessarily your personal former lives, but they can be lives within the system social movements to end child abuse, to End Abuse of our daughters, to end racism, to end speciesism. These things are tackling. These movements are tackling pains which are much deeper than simply our personal pain and we are. The whole system is kind of straining against the burdens of the past in order to open itself, to take in more powerfully, the energy of our future, the light of our future. So So in that context, in the middle of this work, I began to receive visions that were stable, they were consistent, and they stretched over several years. They were dropped into my sessions about where humanity is in its evolutionary journey, where it's going, and there was a message of we were coming into a time of radical, Pivotal breakthrough, a before and after, time that the past would become quickly irrelevant, because something fundamentally new was emerging, but it never showed me. For years how nature was going to accomplish this. I had no idea. And then in 1995 years later, I had a fundamental experience where and I was working at very deep levels. By this time, I was into the diamond Luminosity material. But this session took me and it broke me open. It dissolved my mind into the species mind, and then asked the consciousness of the species. And I understand how radical an assertion that is, and I don't take it lightly, but the species mind opened into it took me into future time. It took me into what I call deep time. And in that future, I experienced the death and rebirth of humanity. I experienced humanity coming to an absolute breaking point, a point of breakdown, an unraveling of fundamental trust, fundamental convictions within our culture, a deep, systematically, systematic breaking down until the entire planet, it seemed, was faced with the task of mere survival, just trying to survive. And it looked like it was an extinction event. At first it looked like that was it. We were we had overloaded the system so badly, we had overdrawn the ecological balance sheet of the planet, so badly that we weren't going to come out of it. But then what happened in the visionary experiences? Just when things were at their worst, we began things began to get lighter. We and people who had been brought to their knees, began to stand up, and it began to reconstate. And as we reconstulated After these series of crises, and I don't know how long they will last, I think of this as kind of a three generational pivot. I can't imagine it lasting less than that. It seems to be the 21st Century is a major pivotal point, because we know by by 2030 2040, 2050, we're going to be getting into worse and worse and worse. Yes, environmental crises. And I think what ha what I think is happening is that by the time we go through this crisis, will we will crack open something so deep in the human spirit, so deep in the human psyche, that what will emerge is a literally transformed humanity, not simply transformed individuals, but a transformation of the fundamental substructure of the human psyche. I think of this as a shift in the plate tectonics of the collective unconscious, so that every human being born after this period of history will be experiencing consciousness within the context of a collective psyche that is different than how we were experiencing it in the 19th and 20th century

Manda Scott  44:50  
now, or for a long time before that, within our time before that.

Chris Bache  44:54  
Yeah. Now, there's another theme that came in where it gave me some. Of the details of what the future human is, and and then other sessions, I was taken far into the future and experience the this archetypal, new archetype of the future human. But in a very profound experience, I had an experience of, I believe in reincarnation. I My first book was on reincarnation. I think the empirical evidence for reincarnation, from a philosopher's perspective, is overwhelming. That's how I'll put those cards on the table. It's always been part of my thinking while I went into these sessions based on the evidence, not because of religious beliefs, and I experienced reincarnation dynamics many times in my sessions, not only my personal reincarnational history, but I experienced reincarnation as a dynamic process for the entire planet. The entire species is pulsing in the rhythm of reincarnation. And if that's true, that reincarnation is a basic fact of life, then we have been we have been building the future human for hundreds of 1000s of years, we have been growing bit by bit, bit by bit, bit by bit. We remember our former lives, usually when we die and we return to the domain of the soul. But I think we are coming into a point of history where the soul is actually coming, becoming conscious inside our historical existence. And the way I experienced this was one day in my session, former lives were coming into me, just coming into me. And it was like wrapping bright white light filament around a kite spool. And there came a moment where they seemed to hit critical mass, and when they hit critical mass, they fused into one, and when they fused into one, there was an explosion of diamond light from my heart, and I was catapulted into a state of consciousness where I was an individual, but I was far beyond Chris Bache. I was an individual like I had never known individuality before. And I came to call this the birth of the diamond soul. Now many people are experiencing this. They give it different names. How I call it is simply my way of languaging at the birth of the diamond soul. And I think what's happening is that the soul, which is the consciousness that holds all our former life history, is waking up inside our historical existence and is supplanting egoic existence, so that we have lived egoic existence for 1000s and 1000s of years, but now the ego has driven the planet into red line conditions, into unacceptable, stressful conditions, and now we either grow up or we go extinct. And what growing up amounts to, I think, is owning the deep history and the deep consciousness, which is our truer nature. It's all divine, of course, but the form of the Divine is our soul nature. And it's not just individuals, I mean, who are waking up, but now nature is putting enormous pressure to wake up the entire species. The entire species is becoming a species of Christ, a species of Buddhas, a species of Prophets, of great spiritual saints and sages of of history. That's the pivot we're trying to make. We're trying to make the pivot of growing up, taking the long view, the seven generation view, really looking at and when the soul wakes up, of course, the whole our whole history becomes kind of dynamically alive within us. We have been male, female, we have been every race on the planet. We've been every religion on the planet, all of these relative

Manda Scott  49:05  
on the other species, absolutely.

Chris Bache  49:10  
And so I think that's what's happening. And I think we are being brought to a critical choice point driven by the ecological crisis and the other systemic crises which are contingent upon the economic realities of the past. We're coming into a meltdown point of those realities, a choice point.

Manda Scott  49:37  
So definitely, I totally take what you're saying, and I would agree with it, if somebody is listening to this podcast, pretty much, by definition, they still have an amount of resource and privilege, because they have the time and the resources to do that. And I hear you that this is perhaps a three generation span, but I'm wondering where we. Are in those three generations. We might not be the first or the three generations alive on the planet. At the moment, the kind of Boomers, Gen X, Gen Z, but then all the others that we've got, more than three generations alive, anybody listening, wherever they are in the span of age or gender or race, what would you recommend? As clearly, we don't have a formula go and do this and this and this, but the concepts within which they could prioritize their life, this is where this is going out on New Year's Day. So what do we do between, what do we create as our soul, as in s, O, Ul, priorities for 2025, that would help to move this process forward. Yeah, a

Chris Bache  50:42  
couple of quick background assumptions that I make. One is that this is a transition which will take the entire resources of the human family. So there is no one formula. It'll take everything we have, everything we are. It'll take scientific knowledge, economic knowledge, political skills, educational skills, medical skills. It'll take everything we have to move us through. Second thing is, my assumption is, and this is based upon years of studying the past life literature, that each one of us has chosen where and when to incarnate with a certain pre vision of what we're getting into and what will be the dominant themes of that incarnation and the resources available within that incarnation, that this is part of our incarnational psychic makeup, And that means each one of us is already positioned by the soul, by our soul, to make a contribution to this transition that we are coming into. So it's not a matter of looking around outside of oneself or somewhere else. It's a matter of looking deeply into where we are, what we are. The key question is, not so much, what can I do? The key question, I think, is, will we have the courage to do what is within my reach to do? That's the key question. If everybody does what is within their reach to do, we will make it through this now, going one step beyond that. There are many people, I think, who are giving us good, wise elder advice on how to engage this moment in history, how to move it forward. Very simply put, I believe one of the ways to do this is to become what you believe the planet needs right now, to become it in your own personal life, to be to internalize the beliefs, the habits of mind, the generosity of heart, the clarity of our thinking and our social skills and social community networks to become what the planet needs. If you have a clear understanding of what the planet needs, and we begin to do that, then we become kind of a microcosm of the whole evolutionary pivot and what is alive within us stimulates and activates what is the people around us who are struggling to do the same thing? So we're all in this together. Our arms are all interlinked. One cell awakens another cell.

Manda Scott  53:36  
Yes, the field effect you were talking about earlier. If we can come into alignment, connect to the web of life. Ask, what do you wanted me and be that? Yeah. Then that in itself, ripples out, and it stops our head minds having to plan, which seems to me quite a letting, letting heart, mind lead and head mind follow, is an inversion of how we got here, but seems to me quite important.

Chris Bache  54:01  
For example, we think that the future human, the planet, needs more of a heart based epistemology, a heart based source of action. And so to put the heart mind kind of ahead of the mind, mind the mind head mind, that's a reading of what's emerging, of what we need to do, right,

Manda Scott  54:22  
right, and the and our understanding may yet evolve. I wouldn't say that's necessarily an end point, but it's it's a starting place to move from here. This is Chris learning

Chris Bache  54:32  
deeply biomimicry, learning the rhythms of nature, learning what's alive and what's in the in the physical world, in the animal world, in the world of insects, everything around us, understanding how we have created imbalance, how we can restore systems, how to create harmony with those systems, how to learn from the engineering that nature has already accomplished through billions of years of evolution within those systems, so many ways.

Manda Scott  55:00  
Yes, and, and I'm thinking healing the trauma, if Francis Waller is right, and we are the trauma culture and the indigenous peoples are are more whole version of humanity. We have 10,000 years of ancestral trauma and potentially previous life trauma. And it seems to me that I end up talking sometimes with people who are fixated on healing their ancestors, and I am increasingly feeling that if I can heal in the moment, that that ripples up and down the timeline, that time is not necessarily one linear thing chucked into identical portions, but that healing now, if I can become a fully realized human being, yeah, that ripples to my parents and their parents and their parents all the way back down the line, and I don't know how physical descendants, but down a spirit descendant line, and that that saves me feeling that I have to heal 10,000 years of ancestors, which is a big Ask, and quite demoralizing. How does that land?

Chris Bache  56:02  
It lands Well, now within a reincarnational framework, we add the writer that we were our ancestors. So we can think of our ancestors in this way we were our ancestors. So when we're healing our ancestors in part, we're healing our own lineage. But anybody worth their salt, any mother, any father worth their salt, who sees a child which is not their own, in need, in pain, actually reaches out to help heal that child. So healing, once you really immerse yourself in that process, the boundaries of healing. Expand that, healing the trauma of ancestors, healing the traumas of your neighbors, healing the trauma of actually creating traumaless societies for our future children. It's it's all good work. It's all hard work, and it's the work of the hours, right?

Manda Scott  57:02  
And people, I have a suspicion, are going to be emailing me afterwards, asking where they can get enough LSD to start on the process. Read the book first people, because Chris did things that the rest of us, I don't necessarily think we want to do, but psychedelics are big now. Is it your belief that everyone should be within a structured and held way and with suitable reflection exploring psychedelics. Or is it that a critical mass does that and the effect rolls out to the rest of us?

Chris Bache  57:33  
I don't think it's wise for everybody to have a value that everybody should try psychedelics. Get into psychedelics. Psychedelics are basically amplifiers of consciousness. They amplify consciousness. What you do with those amplified states of awareness in those precious hours really determines the value how you use them. You can use them recreationally. You can go to a Grateful Dead concert. You can talk with some friends, or you can use them to expose your shadow, to heal your shadow, and to move into deeper cosmological exploration. But many of us are carrying tensions within our psyche which should not be amplified, and this I mean Carl Jung would listen to people's dreams on their first day when they came to work with them. And he wouldn't work with some people because he knew that they were not ready to undertake the depth of work that would emerge working with him. And I think this is true for psychedelics. There are some people who should there are a lot of people who should not use psychedelics. The circumstances, the patterns of their consciousness. Currently, it's too strong a medicine. They need a gentler way in, slower way in. But among people who are, say, basically healthy, a healthy psyche we're not caring.

Manda Scott  59:01  
Do you know anyone who has a healthy psyche?

Chris Bache  59:04  
I know somebody have a healthier psyche.

Manda Scott  59:07  
Yes, yes. I'm thinking of a lot of my friends who are just really wounded guys. I think a lot of people that I know have have healthier psyches. But I think all of us are carrying quite deep, frozen hearts still.

Chris Bache  59:17  
And if you go in, if you're working, choose to work with psychedelics, I would say, very controlled circumstances. You know, you really want to batten down the hive just carefully before you set out into the deep water. Very conscientious control of dose, first, purity of substance, because that's always an issue. And, you know, pure substance, because a lot of crap comes in. What you get on the street, pure substances, careful containers, therapeutic structure, you know, therapeutically monitored, structured experiences. Groups are, I don't think it's good to do what I did to work solo. Uh, it adds unnecessary burden. It's good to have a group, even

Manda Scott  1:00:03  
though you were held by the person who held you.

Chris Bache  1:00:07  
I was held by I wasn't totally alone. I was held by my wife, uh, Carol, that my manager was a PhD psychologist, but it wasn't healthy in the sense that I didn't have a group that I could share my experiences with beyond that inner circle, I wasn't able to talk about it and to take in other people's experiences until way too far down the road. So you know, Ayahuasca communities, Psilocybin communities, where people can work, journey together, process together, be a mirror to each other. Help expose the shadow in their post session personalities. The greatest danger of working with psychedelics is psychic inflation, right? You can think that because

Manda Scott  1:00:56  
you have become God now I can tell you everything.

Chris Bache  1:00:59  
Yeah, exactly, we just because you've had a special experience, you think you're a special person, and you know it that's just a big fallacy.

Manda Scott  1:01:10  
Yeah, there's Ayahuasca is in the incoming administration in the US, or at least not Ayah scares, but people who have taken Ayahuasca in the incoming administration in the US, and, yeah, yeah. I'm sure they're wonderful human beings, but breaking everything, yeah. And I think one of the things that I heard from an Ayahuasca who has spent very large amounts of time in the forest is that Western people tend to want to come and do it and go away again, and don't want to spend the weeks and months of really getting to know the plant and letting go of the ego. It's, yeah, it's a process, not an event, long process. We're not used to that in our culture.

Chris Bache  1:01:52  
And let me recommend a book on Ayahuasca to your read to your audience, and that is Bill Barnard's book published by Columbia University Press, which is insignificant, and his book is liquid light. And Bill is a university professor at Southern Methodist University. He had several books under his belt. He's a very well recognized philosopher of religion. He has a book on William James, a book on Henri Berkson, but the book liquid light tells a story of years and years and years decades of going down to South America, living in the Santo dynamic community, working every sabbatical and every vacation with his teachers there. And it's a it's an analysis of the scientific dynamic community, and it's also an analysis of his own experiences in the Santo dynamic community. So it's another academic becoming autobiographical without being trapped within his personal story. And it's specifically focused and he is a beautiful writer, and his experiences are very powerful, brilliant.

Manda Scott  1:03:03  
I will find that and put it in the show notes. I could go on forever we are heading towards the end of time, the end of our time, not necessarily the end of all time. A number of questions with all of the coders of what we just said, it strikes me that you are probably familiar now with an emerging network of people who are working together with a variety of different psychedelic substances. Are you seeing networks of consciousness such that people are this is about to sound really flaky, but a lot of the push that I'm getting is to do the work so that I can actually connect with all of my students in the dream in a way that we're both fully aware of, not I just get an email going. I saw you in the dream last night. You did this. I think, well, that's really nice, but I have no awareness of that that we move to methods of human networking that are similar to but beyond the digital networking that we just moved into within the last 20 years. Are you seeing anything approaching that? Or, if not, would you like to speak to what is happening in terms of a collective community, if anything?

Chris Bache  1:04:13  
Yeah, well, first I want to own my limitations in that even though I've published this book, and even though I speak at some conferences, I don't speak at most psychedelic conferences, because my work is pretty radical, and the focus on the psychedelic renaissance right now is on therapy and careful scientific studies demonstrating The therapeutic efficacy of psychedelics, and that's perfectly fine. That's that's where we need to be. But there the movement is not yet pushing the cosmological territory that I've pushed in my work.

Manda Scott  1:04:52  
Yeah, it'll get there. Must be somebody somewhere that can't be that just you did it well,

Chris Bache  1:04:57  
like Bill Barnard, and there are people, but. I think a lot of it is still underground at this point. So I am aware of certain trends in the Renaissance community and in the psychedelic community, but I I don't have a Catholic, comprehensive breadth of access to the what's happening. So I, you know, I worked in isolation. My work is unusually intense and extreme, and I live basically a pretty quiet life around that. But what I do see, and there are some people doing, as you're describing, cultivating kind of communities of paranormal contact within the dream state, extended dreaming, doing different things. There are people who are working in meditation, trying to integrate psychedelics into meditation circles. There's a lot. There's a lot going on. A lot moving. I think the internet is a physical manifestation, in a sense, the the hard wires of an emerging of this emerging field consciousness. So that even if we don't accomplish these networks psychically, we certainly can. We're on a network right now. We're, this is a global network that we're part of.

Manda Scott  1:06:24  
It is but somebody could pull a plug on it tomorrow, if China or Russia or somebody decides to just switch it or monitor it such that it's not safe to say anything outside a certain narrow bandwidth, it could vanish. The freedom that we have just now is not, is not a given, I would say, whereas if we could talk to each other without needing the internet, it would be quite hard to interfere

Chris Bache  1:06:49  
with that, it would be great that the complication, of course, is the clarity of the transmission, the purity of the transmission, because the personal psyche throws up all sorts of filters. Yeah.

Manda Scott  1:07:02  
Ego gets in the way. Basically, head, mind gets in the way. Yeah, okay, I think we never got to. Actually, you said, I'll come to it later. Of why I stopped. Did you feel that you covered that? Did you want to cover that? If not, is there anything else that you feel we could usefully cover in the time that we go,

Chris Bache  1:07:21  
that's actually might be a good place to wrap up some of the discussion, because it's relevant to where we might go. I stopped for two reasons. I stopped first because my physical system that my subtle energy system, my Prana or qi energy system was running so hot after all these years of practice that it was producing certain physical symptoms that was leaving me continually physically uncomfortable, and I describe these in The book, but basically I understood enough about chronic energy and Ayurvedic medicine and to understand what was happening, and I was just running too much energy. But that's not the major reason I stopped. The major reason I stopped was heartache. That is, it was getting increasingly difficult to come back from the deep states of ecstatic Transcendence, immersion in the divine fabric, to come out of that, back into my time, space, reality. And there are beings. There are great beings who are able to sustain that those transcendental states in their time, space personality, they are great masters, and truly, all honor to the great masters. I'm not one of those beings. This is a path of temporary immersion that's different than the path of contemplative presence. So I can go into those states, but I have to come out of them, and eventually coming back out just became too painful of a separation, so I stopped, and I knew I would be stopping for the rest of my life, because it takes years and years of momentum to develop the energy to break into these high, high energy states I could, if I did a massive dose of LSD right now, I would not be able to go back to where I was working at the end of my 20 year journey. Yeah, so I knew I was stopping for the rest of my life, but it was important for me to stop, and I had to first learn how to manage the heartache, and then to begin the process of working the slower process of integrating those living memories, actively living memories, into my physical existence, which conversations like this actually helped me do. So it's a very it's. Healing for me to talk about these things with you so and the way that applies to maybe some of your listeners, is to be careful about how much you bite off in your sessions, because even if you're really committed to conscientious integration, you can bite off more than you can chew, or more than it's wise for you to chew. So I think we can learn a lot from the contemplative traditions. It's one of the advantages I had going into this work. I was teaching courses in mysticism and meditation, teaching courses in Shamanism and Buddhism. So I understood the literature of mysticism. I understood the practices of mysticism, the purification processes, and Ian and I tried to use those processes in my own work. And there's a lot of wisdom there. So it's it serves you to be well read, and I think to recognize the limitations of any one incarnation. I think that in some ways, I went to places that were so deep, it will take me not just one incarnation, but multiple incarnations, to truly integrate them. And by that, I mean being able to manifest those levels of a consciousness inside my physical consciousness, comfortably,

Manda Scott  1:11:28  
okay, right? Yes, yes.

Chris Bache  1:11:31  
So I would basically hate for anyone to try to do what I did and get into trouble and hurt themselves. That would just break my heart.

Manda Scott  1:11:40  
Yeah, yeah. I think we've, we've got the health warnings fairly clear on here. If you're going to work with things, work with somebody who knows really what they're doing. Me and my apprentice are working to find people that we can pass people on to, because we get emails saying I took substance X, and basically I'm having a psychotic breakdown. What can I do? And we're shamanic practitioners. Actually, it's not our field, so we're trying to pass this on to people who can actually help, but they're few and far between, because there's a lot more people who think they can help than the ones who can actually help. So take great care, find test your people out before you decide to do something that is irreversible. I would say it's really clear. And then do the work beforehand, and do the work during, and do the work after after, to integrate and integrate and integrate and do it because you're doing it in service to life, and not because you're trying to make your ego feel happy. Yeah, strikes me as a quite important one. Have I missed anything out on the

Chris Bache  1:12:40  
health world? I think it's great. And if you do your work well, one of the things that happens is you lose all fear of death. You once, you transition several times into that reality. You know, in your bones, from your own experience, that death is not an end of anything. It's simply an end of an incarnational cycle, and there is absolutely nothing to fear about death. Death is homecoming, all of the Hollywood bullshit that are thrown up at us for, you know, dark places and demons and ghosts and all this stuff, it's just nonsense. 99% of people die and make a transition into the light perfectly naturally and comfortably. If you're afraid of dying, you've got your entire metaphysics upside down. Death is homecoming. Death is the end of your this matriculation. It's the harvesting of your life. Birth should be mourned. Birth is where the work begins. It's like being a freshman in college. It's hard. Graduation is wonderful, right? And when you lose your fear of death, and you begin to understand the deeper, meaningful challenges which are embedded in our time space experiences, then the whole, if you lose your fear of death, your whole game of life changes, because death is what people fear more than anything else. And if you don't have that fear, then you're you're going into a different lifestyle, a different way of living, a more joyful way of living.

Manda Scott  1:14:16  
Yes, yes. Thank you. Thank you. That feels to me, a fantastic place to end. Does that feel good to you? It feels good to me. All right, in that case, Chris, thank you so much for coming on to the accidental gold podcast. This has been an absolute delight. I have enjoyed every moment, and I think what a way to start the year.

Chris Bache  1:14:35  
Thank you. Thank you, Amanda, and thank you for your work. We need all of the awareness that we can bring to ourselves, and you are certainly bringing awareness to many people. Thank you. You.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
