Chris Bache  0:01  
Hi everybody. It's nice to see your faces. Nice to see the Meet the Klan who is interested in the things that the presenters are interested in. Short Introduction, I've made my living as a university professor in Ohio. I taught in the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at young sound state. I taught in religious studies, Eastern religion, psychology of mysticism, comparative spirituality, Eastern thought. But what brings me here today is not that work, but it's my work with psychedelics, which basically I did for 20 years while I was an academic, but I wasn't really allowed to speak about those things in the academic environment, and it was only after I retired that I was able to write a book that I'd like to speak from today. Now let me see if I can get this working correctly. This is a book that I published at the end of last year. It's a book I'd like to speak from today. It tells the story of where I went. Over 20 years of working with LSD, I followed a protocol established by Stan Grof, working in psychedelic therapy, which is totally isolated, isolated. The conventional sort of therapeutic environment, totally isolated. Working with headphones and eyeshades and music and all those traditional trappings, except that I worked with very high doses. I did 73 sessions over 20 years, working with between 506 100 micrograms. I don't recommend this protocol. I wouldn't do it the same way if I were starting over again, but that's what I did, and this is the story. When someone asks me, what's it like taking that doses of LSD that's high, I say it's it's like being the middle of a nuclear explosion. It just completely shatters all the dimensions of your mind and the boundaries of consciousness. And if you keep this up for long periods of time, it reveals levels of reality that lie beyond time, space reality, it is like this nuclear explosion, which, as it pushes higher into the atmosphere, it takes levels of the atmosphere that are invisible and makes them visible when you work systematically with psychedelics, whether it's an indigenous context, or in contemporary context, you basically go through a process that reveals levels of existence that lie beyond your ordinary sensory experience. Very briefly, in the book, I tell the story of the levels of consciousness that I went through in this process, going through a series of death and rebirth experiences, a series that took place at first the personal level of mind, where one is dealing with personal issues, eventually going through ego death, and then at the collective level of mind, where you're engaging deep structures within the collective psyche. Third, the archetypal dimension of mind, going beyond time space, reality, entering into being, dissolved into some of the archetypal structures that underlie physical existence. Fourth, going into causal level reality, causal oneness. And finally, entering, for me, entering into what I call the diamond Luminosity, what Buddhism calls Dharmakaya, or the absolute, the clear light of absolute reality. Making a transition from one level to another involves going through a series of deaths and rebirth. It's not simply ego death. It's going through a death that takes place at the collective level, deaths that take place at the archetypal level, and so on and so forth, entering into deeper intimacy with the universe. Now that's all the slides I wanted to share, let me see if I can get out of that. Such a long journey, so many years, so many levels of consciousness, it's impossible for me to summarize them very succinctly. But for today's presentation, I simply wanted to focus on two aspects of this story which I think are relevant to this discussion of the relationship between consciousness and the exploration of consciousness and building the regenerative society. The first issue has to do with something that happened in the collective level of mind, and the second has to do with what I call the birth of the future human. After I had gone through ego death. After I had worked for a couple of years and had gone through a number of different ego death experiences, I entered a domain that involved large quantities of vast territories of collective suffering, a domain that I call the. Ocean of suffering. It eventually expanded over two years to encompass hundreds of 1000s of beings, of persons and 1000s of years of time. And this was confusing to me at first, because I did this work, like many people working with psychedelics, thinking that I was doing this work for my personal benefit that I was doing it to heal myself, to enlighten myself, to accelerate my own spiritual development, but it was always kind of self or self referencing. What I found was that this ocean of suffering went on for so long and it was so challenging and involved so many 1000s of people that eventually it shattered the very model that I had brought to working with psychedelics, and I abandoned what I would call the individual model of transformation, and I adopted a collective model of transformation. That is, I believe that what I was doing when I entered into the ocean of suffering was actually being used or facilitating a healing that was not focused in my personal life or my personal soul even, but it was focused on the collective psyche of Humanity, that something was using my sessions to drain toxins that live in human psyche that are the residue of unresolved trauma from 1000s and 1000s of years of war and the terrible things that we've done to each Other through history. Eventually, this work culminated in an orgy of cleansing and purification and healing, and I was jettisoned from there on into archetype of reality, and I never returned into the ocean of suffering. My point from this, to keep it very short, my point is everything we do when we are working in deep states of consciousness not only affects our personal being, but it affects the beings of those around us. It affects those who are immediately around us in our system of social relationships. Some of my work affected my students, for example, without them knowing what I was doing. But it also reaches deeper than that. It reaches deep into the fiber of the collective psyche of humanity. And I think when we work in deep, Non-ordinary states, we are if we choose to do it, if we choose to allow this to happen, or if it is our karma for this to happen, we go through processes. We do things which allow us to facilitate a direct healing, a direct transformation of our species as a whole, of our deep family, there is no private self in the world. We are part of a species. Our species is part of the ecosystem of Earth, and earth is part of the galaxy and so on and so forth. And when we do this work conscientiously, we are given opportunities to bring about a transformation which I think extends far beyond our personal life and far beyond our moment in time. Now, perhaps because of this very strong collective orientation my work, something else began to happen. Over the course of the 20 years that I was doing this work, I began to experience a series of visions about the human trajectory of evolution, about where evolution was taking humanity, where we were, what was happening in the larger scheme of things, I entered repeatedly, a state of consciousness that I would describe as deep time. Deep time is not eternity. It isn't timelessness. It's a it's a condition of time in which you can experience hundreds of years, or even 1000s and 10s of 1000s of years in a very compressed time frame, sometimes as a simultaneous now, I entered into deep time, slowly, personally, with my own personal deep time, and then I entered from there into collective deep time in which I was given teachings about where humanity was in its evolution and what was happening and where we were going. There is a chapter in the book called The Birth of the future human, and the focus of these visions was that humanity was coming into a culmination point.

Chris Bache  9:48  
They were coming we were coming into a before and after point, a turning point, a critical transformation that involved the entire human family. What? Is emphasized was that the creative intelligence of the universe was not simply trying to awaken individuals. It's almost as if the age of individual enlightenment was over, but the creative intelligence was actually trying to awaken the entire human species, and that we were poised on the cusp of a profound transformation of the human condition, a transformation that would change not only our economy and our ecological values and our social orientation. It would reach so deep that it would actually change the bedrock of the human psyche. It would change the fundamental archetypal blueprint of the human psyche that that, in my understanding, is that is our hour of history. That is what's happening. That is what we are entering. The visions that I had for this I did this work between 1979 and 1999 so when I when this was taking place. This is 30 to 25 years ago in which I was experiencing these things. And in one critical series of sessions, I was taken deep into humanity's future, and I experienced the death and rebirth of humanity. All mystics tell us, we learn from the mystical traditions that before Great Awakening, there takes place a great death, before the awakening of mystical oneness, we experience the dark night of the soul. Humanity as a whole was entering the dark night of the soul, of its soul, which is a time of intense purification, a content confrontation with our historical karma, with the limitations that we have created and lived with in history. And in this series of sessions, I went deep into the future, and I experienced the complete collapse of civilization as we know. It, just a profound implosion that seemed to be driven by an ecological crisis, but an ecological crisis that was so deep that it triggered a global systems disintegration at our collective level and just at the depth of this death process when it looked like it was going to be an extinction event, I experienced that the worst of the problem that was like a storm passing over, a hurricane passing over a Pacific Island. The storm passed and the survivors began to get up and pick themselves up and began to begin anew, and when they began anew, they were different human beings that a transformation took place in the depth of this death and rebirth process in which we let go fundamental beliefs and values and patterns of our past and we engage the future as different human beings with an expanded heart, a profound, innate sense of the oneness of existence and our oneness with other human beings, a profound a deeper transparency to the mind of the universe as A whole. This truly was a before and after point in time. It took me literally years to recover from the tremendous time expansion and this encounter with this, at the one hand, awesome, and at the other hand, very challenging and very difficult confrontation with the human story, or extension of the human story, but this has been the reality that I've lived with ever since. It's been the reality that I understand what is taking place in history today. It's been the reality that basically is my background to confronting the covid 19 crisis, the pandemic, which I see, is simply just an overture to a much series of punctuated historical crises that lie ahead for us in the 21st Century. And I think there is a correlation between what's happening in the outer world and what's happening in the inner world that as the at the outer world, as we are trying to become one planet, an integrated planet with an integrated citizen, Sri and a healthy planet. That external drive to oneness is being mirrored in an internal drive to oneness, which involves, I think, an integration of the soul into time, space, reality. And by the soul, I mean the consciousness that holds all the experiences of all of our former lives. I think basically our consciousness of all of our former lives is coming together and fusing, and when they fuse, it creates a higher form of consciousness. Which really, I think, is the new platform of humanity in future time. Now I think I probably close to the end of my time. I know I've thrown a lot of large ideas out there, so I'll just stop there and see where we take this.

Daniel Pinchbeck  15:20  
Christopher, that was wonderful. Thank you so much for sharing. I really love your work, and I love your vision, and it's kind of, yeah, I mean, extraordinary to talk with somebody who has explored the sort of depth dimensions of the LSD space, perhaps as much as anybody alive right now. I'm kind of curious. What's your perspective on LSD. I mean, did you have any perspective on what it is in this, in this exploration? Is it itself a you know, is there an entities attached to it? Is it a being? Is it just a chemical catalyst? Is it here accidentally? Is there some kind of intentionality to it?

Chris Bache  16:01  
Well, given the synchronicity of the birth of the atomic bomb and the birth of LSD in the same decade, I don't think it's an accident that it's here. I understand it to be an amplifier and a catalyst of consciousness, similar to S is Psilocybin and Ayahuasca and DMT and five Meo DMT, each of these are fundamental catalysts of consciousness. Each of them have their own distinctive characteristics. One of the things I think, which is different about LSD is it's relatively new, and therefore humanity doesn't have a lot of history with it. I my sense is that when we do Ayahuasca and when we do Psilocybin, we don't only experience the physiological absorption of this chemical into our biophysiology, but we also engage the fields which have been fields of consciousness, which have been created by all the beings who have worked with this substance through through time. So because we've been using Psilocybin for 1000s of years, we've been using Ayahuasca for 1000s of years. They are very strong fields associated with these substances that we encounter when we use these substances. LSD is a relatively young substance, and therefore I experience it being unusually clean. In this respect, I did not experience much of a cultural overlay, much of an historical overlay. It seems to be particularly clean. And I experience it as and remember, I was working at high levels, higher levels than I recommend, 500 to 600 micrograms. It has a tendency to drive to the high ceiling of the high cosmological ceiling. Psilocybin is much more body grounded at the states of consciousness that awakens are much more, kind of closer to where we live in our body. LSD isn't necessarily so at lower doses, yes, but in higher doses, it tends to dry, drive high into the cosmology.

Daniel Pinchbeck  18:00  
I'm also kind of curious. I bet you seem like you have a bit of a Buddhist orientation also. Am I correct in

Chris Bache  18:06  
that that's true? Yeah,

Daniel Pinchbeck  18:09  
you mentioned reincarnation in past lives. I'm kind of curious, if you have a insight into what that means. I mean, I got very excited by amitha Swamis book. I think it was called the self aware universe. Amigos, a quantum physicist who was, I believe, working at Institute of Noetic Sciences, and he began to look at how quantum physics, action at a distance, could kind of provide a, you know, at least a you know, starting point for scientific hypothesis around how there might be kind of an aggregate, kind of a quantum aggregate of, you know, feeling willing, thinking, that somehow continues, connected, you know, after, after the physical death, and kind of seeks to re aggregate, to continue some process towards maybe the ultimate goal of, you know, unification or realization or enlightenment. I don't know if you had any any thoughts in those regards.

Chris Bache  19:02  
Regards I do. Reincarnation is a fundamental part of my worldview. The first book I wrote is a book on reincarnation, life cycles, and it discusses the empirical evidence. As a philosopher, I believe that the physical, the evidence, the scientific evidence for reincarnation now is overwhelming. We have extraordinary number of cases. Ian Stevenson's work with young children at the University of Virginia basically established the empirical database for justifying a belief in reincarnation. Now that doesn't mean we understand the physics of it. There's so much we still don't understand about it, but a fundamental principle that I take away from Stevenson's work and all the work done by past life therapist in the cycle psychotherapeutic community is that nature retains its learning. Nature holds on to its learning. My understanding is that reincarnation is the higher octave of evolution. So an evolution. Then we find that nature folds forward the learning of groups in reincarnation, nature has found a way of folding forward in time, the learning of individuals. Now, I think eventually, lifetime after lifetime after lifetime, we're learning more, we're becoming more. We're acquiring more skills. We're activating more potentials that are late within our structure, sooner or later, sooner or later, I believe all of our reincarnational history becomes integrated into a higher order of intelligence. I've experienced this in my sessions where all of my former lives came together and they came together, and they fused. And when they fuse, there was an enormous explosion of energy of diamond light broke out of my chest, and it shot me into a state of consciousness in which I was an individual, but I was an individual beyond any frame of reference I had previously known.

Daniel Pinchbeck  21:02  
We had a question from Deanna. She's curious to know your thoughts and experience and people getting to these places of insight, integration and deep time without the use of mind altering drugs or plant medicines.

Chris Bache  21:15  
Absolutely, I've had many people write me since this book has been published, and they say I understand what you're talking about. I've had experiences similar to what you're describing, but I've never done psychedelics. I'm a lifelong meditator. I've had these experiences under Med, with meditation, and I think that's absolutely true. If LSD is an amplifier of consciousness, it is consciousness that does the work, and there are many ways of intensifying and amplifying consciousness. We know many of the forms, LSD or psychedelics, is simply another form, another key to working with consciousness, but it's consciousness that does the work.

Daniel Pinchbeck  21:55  
Yeah, and what kind of since you have these insights into kind of the future, although didn't exactly seem like you had an exact time frame, but I remember in dark night, early dawn, you kind of said it was going to be a very compressed period when civilization began to crack apart, and these kind of emergent new properties of the new human, you know, kind of began to integrate together. You know what you know? Maybe that's not, that's what I remember, but you tell me if I'm wrong. But then also I'm curious, like, you know, how would you ground that into, like, practical advice for people in this time? Is there, you know? Should you know? Is doing these psychedelic, entheogenic explorations a form of a way to prepare oneself for what's coming? You know? Is there a way we can minimize the destructive impacts of what's coming, because it definitely feels like there's a bit of a destructive express train heading our way right now.

Chris Bache  22:50  
There is, it's kind of a Kali destroyer. In order to make room for the new I think there are many things we can do. I think basically collectively, we're facing our collective shadow, and that collective shadow is a shadow that all of us have personally had a hand in creating, in the sense that we have lived through history, and therefore we have been part of our history. And this kind of confrontation with the collective shadow is part of our common work. Now, I think one of the ways in which we can consciously participate in this process is first by understanding what's taking place. And you're right, I wasn't given any specific details of date. I wasn't given any details of exactly how, when and where this was going to take place. I was given experiences of this, of this meltdown, not as an individual would experience, but But literally ask the human species as a whole would experience it. And I think the one of the key things we can do is basically take responsible for responsibility for our own shadow, to do whatever psychotherapeutic work, psychedelic work, meditational work, spiritual work, to basically help us confront the the shadow dimensions of our own being, in order to dissolve those and let light in where previously darkness had reigned. But then at another level, we can collectively participate and help others in confronting the shadow of our culture, the shadow of history. That's the kind of political action side, the social action side.

Daniel Pinchbeck  24:37  
Beautiful Christopher, I love it. I think that'll be great to have David, Luke, come on and speak for a bit, and then maybe have a little bit of a dialog after So, David, if you are there, do you want to jump in?

David Luke  24:49  
Yeah, sure. Hi. Can you hear me? Okay, yep. Oh, great, yeah. Good to be here. Thanks for inviting me along. Good see everybody. Thanks for that. Chris, fantastic. Is that? To hear you talk. So I'll just give you a little bit of background about me, and I'm going to give you kind of pricey of I've been doing for the last few decades, or what the insights I've kind of come to so I'm a psychologist by training, primarily parapsychologist, Transpersonal psychologist, and my kind of big umbrella area of interest is kind of altered states of consciousness and anomalous or Transpersonal experiences. So I've done a lot of research on all kinds of old states. I do a lot of research, specifically with psychedelics. I do a lot of research when I'm not on psychedelics as well, but it's not as much fun. And so I'm going to give you a kind of a bit of an overview of some of the insights I've had that come from the research, but also my own particular journey as well. So insights that are coming from the research and what the journey involves and what it leads to, you could pretty much sum up the kind of the where we are currently with our kind of intellectual quest, by suggesting that psychedelics and altered states in general, because I think all old states have a have a kind of continuity with psychedelic experiences. Just perhaps the volumes turned up more with psychedelic experiences is they increase connectivity, and they increase connectivity across the whole kind of spectrum of experience, from the biological through the psychological, the sociological, the ecological, and even into the cosmological or spiritual realms, perhaps so on a biological level, we know from research at Imperial College, for instance, they increase connectivity within different brain regions, so areas of your brain, which don't normally communicate with each other, suddenly become very communicative. They have hyper connectivity. And on a kind of cognitive level, this explains things like synaesthesia, divergent thinking and increased creativity, cognitive flexibility and so on. On a psychological level, they connect us with ourselves, so they give us access to our unconscious material. Tap straight into that your shadow, as Chris said, your personal history, your past traumas and so on, and hopefully through a kind of assistance, or through being guided through that journey, you can come to some kind of resolution of your prior traumas. I just found a brilliant quote by GABA Matt a about half an hour ago. He says, Every human being has a true, genuine, authentic self, and the trauma is the disconnection from it, and the healing is the reconnection with it, and we know that this results in a kind of enhanced mood, well being and enhanced mindfulness. From a site, psychological, scientific perspective on a sociological level, psychedelics in old states can help us connect, increase our connection to each other. They can increase our openness to experience, our willingness to engage with, you know, culture and art and different perspectives. They increase our empathy. They increase compassion. And this can lead to increase in pro social behavior and enhanced value orientations. This is where my own particular area of research has been, kind of deep diving more recently, is into the ecological perspective on that level, and that we find that these states of consciousness can increase our connection to nature, which I think is kind of pretty vital right now. So we have an increase in Eco consciousness or biophilia, interspecies communications or interspecies connections also increase, and this has a concomitant knock on effect of increases in ecologically orientated behavior. So from a big survey I conducted, we found that of the people had taken psychedelics. They said their psychedelic experiences and the majority had made them change their diet, become more raw, more vegan, more local, more vegetarian. It also increased in the majority of the sample, the amount of gardening they do, which is a massive take home news. Headline, psychedelics increase gardening. This is big news everybody. And they can also increase people's ecological activism. And even people change their career as a result of their psychedelic experiences. And then so we go beyond the environment, the ecosystem and the biosphere into the cosmological levels as well. We find that people have a greater sense of connection to the universe God, the other, whatever it might be, and went to the realms of Transpersonal and mystical experiences, which have the knock on effect of helping people reduce their fear of death, enhancing spirituality, enhancing their sense of purpose and meaning, increasing self, Transcendence. And we find in the clinical research with psychedelics that those people who have had a mystical experience by the kind of standard psychological measures are the ones that have the best clinical outcomes in terms of dealing with addictions, fighting depression, anxiety or even end of life fears. So. So all of that is encapsulated within this kind of notion of of course, we need the appropriate set, setting and substance and the preparation and integration to book end it. So there's some kind of insights about where we are with the research currently, insights directly from the journey. I think I'm going to give over a few points here, one of which is, I think the psychonaut and scientist John Lily best encapsulated this for me, and that is that he had this famous dictum, which is in the province of the mind, what one believes to be true is either true or becomes true within certain limits. These limits are to be found experimentally, I through science and experientially so through personal endeavor, and when these are found, they just turn out to be more beliefs to be transcended. In the problems of the mind, there are no limits. He did add a little addendum to that, however, after a few near death experiences, pushing his physical body to the limits, and he said, however, in the promise of the body, there are certain limits not to be transcended, but in the problems to the mind is limitless. So this kind of gives off two other kind of interesting points and avenues. Is that what the first one is that beliefs are our reality. Our reality is only constrained by our beliefs. But there's a danger in that as well, because they can our beliefs can also be prisons. Our convictions can make us convicts, and we know that because what kind of psychological rabbit holes we can fall down, such as confirmation bias, whereby our beliefs prescribe the kind of things and information that we're willing to accept or even look for in the first place, and we just end up bootstrapping our own dogmas and belief systems. And we see this kind of kind of transposed into into science and the endeavor of the research of consciousness, where, you know, the kind of the academy and the scientific endeavor is pretty much constrained by its a priori dogmatic kind of reliance on materialist reductionism, This kind of neuro reductionist perspective on physicalism, and this view that the human organism and consciousness itself is merely just a mechanistic process, and that consciousness and life is kind of devoid of any kind of real sentience or or life, for that matter. So and how that translates is this, these kind of limiting beliefs therefore constrain the kind of questions that scientists even ask in the first place, so they only ask questions which tend to support these kind of prior dogmatic belief systems about the material nature of the universe. And therefore, you know, fields of research like Transpersonal psychology and parapsychology don't receive any funding, and so we don't just kind of get a big enough voice in the kind of dominant paradigm and worldview. So basically, make an argument for agnosticism and plurality, plurality that we should have, you know, be, should be open to many, many world views and perspectives and and try not to believe anything particularly, you know, just to just beware, be wary of beliefs in general, and that's kind of quite useful in this era of apparent fake news, you know, post truth era. And I think we've always been in a post truth era since, you know, the dawn of communication, because we see in nature that nature is constantly using deception for its own particular survival. So, you know, there's never been such a thing as real news, right, or true news. But I think it's good to kind of take an agnostic position and a plurality and not get too hooked on any particular belief system. The other dictum, I think, that comes out of John Lilly's famous sentence, is that the mind is infinite. Okay? So, I mean, we can see that as apparent from, you know, evidence from genius, inspiration, creativity, along with the findings of things like parapsychology, which show that, you know it by the empirical evidence standards of today, there is, I think there's very we can talk to Dean Radin about this. There's very little room to consider that the evidence is not substantial enough to pause the idea that we can transcend time and space and access any point of time and space with our mind. And I think Chris would probably back that up with his various LSD sessions. And I think the research and theory and physics is beginning to look more like Parapsychology all the time. There's an increasing conceptual confluence of both the fundamental quantities and forces of physics with consciousness. You know, time is now considered to be somewhat time. Subjective. Human Experience of time is considered to be illusory, and things like pre cognition become more and more possible all the time. And then finally, my final point is, then everything is connected.

David Luke  34:49  
That's one thing of parapsychology and psychedelics and Transpersonal psychology has shown us that everything is connected. We can transcend time and space. We know that from the evidence, from precognition to empathy and. Clairvoyance, synchronicities and so on, although that is circumscribed by point two, you know, that's circumscribed by our beliefs and the limitations of our beliefs. And as a result of that, we should act with openness transparency in everything that we do, with compassion and with the spirit of reciprocity. And so that we kind of start to move away from all kinds of isms, including the ones that aren't given much air time these days, you know, things like ethnocentrism, but also species centrism, stepping outside the box of thinking we're at the top of the of the food chain, and even cognoscentricism. So that is the view that, you know, only one state of consciousness is valued in our current society, everything to be more pluralistic and value everything from dreams to meditation to psychedelics and so on. And that takes us back to the beginning, is that these old states of consciousness can help us move towards increased connectivity. So that's it,

Daniel Pinchbeck  35:59  
David, that was awesome. Thank you so much. And, yeah, the work you're doing is tremendous. Yeah, I guess I'm curious a little bit about, you know, what you wrote about in the book about extraordinary experiences, kind of like, you know, the psychic and the paranormal experiences that are so common in psychedelic states, and what that kind of reveals about consciousness in your perspective?

David Luke  36:23  
Yeah, I think, I think it poses an enormous question mark against the idea that you know brain, or that consciousness is confined to the brain, right? I mean, we already have kind of 135 years of evidence from Parapsychology that you know, psychic abilities and the Transcendence of time and space. Have some really good evidence to back it up. It's not an everyday experience, but it happens to enough people enough times and under control laboratory situations that we can say, Okay, this is ability to transcend time and space and psychedelics pretty much just turn up the volume on that. You know, people have way more of these psychic experiences, paranormal like experiences, Transpersonal experiences with psychedelics. And I believe, you know, a good proportion of those are probably very genuine. Some of them may be a bit delusional, but some of them may be very genuine. And I think the evidence is moving towards that. There hasn't been enough research done on that, but we have, you know, 1000s of years of shamanic practice using psychedelics and other states of consciousness, which is for that very purpose. And I think we need to spend more time listening and communicating with indigenous peoples who have this animistic, shamanistic world view and what can be learned from that. So I think we come to this point where, you know, the cork is out of the genus bottle. Now the academy is once more exploring psychedelics in a kind of serious way. We can't deny that the people are having a large amount of these Transpersonal and even parapsychological, paranormal like experiences, and we should openly investigate them with an open mind at face value, rather than just trying to explain

Daniel Pinchbeck  38:05  
them away. I guess my understanding is that psychic and paranormal effects are extremely difficult to study under normal, traditional research methods. I've heard, for instance, that even when an effect seems to be demonstrated at first with repeat experiments, it seems that the correlation goes down. It's almost like the secret, you know, there's a secret that tries to protect itself or that doesn't want to make itself known to humanity at this point.

David Luke  38:35  
Well, you can ask Dean more about that. I think there is a sense in which a lot of the Parapsychology experiments aren't immediately repeatable, but when you stack them together with meta analyzes, you do find this kind of highly significant data set. When you take all the research that's been done, you add it all together, and these results are kind of highly compelling. There is a sense in which some of the effects do reduce over time, but they hit a plateau, you know. So like the gansfield studies, have remained a kind of 35% kind of 32% above chance, you know, figure beyond this kind of initial decline. So overall, when you stack the data, the effects are actually there, but in a way, it's very hard to learn much about them, largely due to the complexity, I think, of the factors involved. You know, we're dealing with with kind of turning a mirror on consciousness itself, and it becomes a very slippery endeavor. It's like we the some of the major problems are we don't know where the psychic abilities are coming from, theoretically, because it could always just be the experimenter themselves are exerting their psychic abilities, their precognition, whatever it is, to try and get the results they need. And so all, I think we need to take that very seriously, because it applies to the whole and scientific endeavor. Like, for instance, you know the Higgs boson, the discovery. The CERN particle accelerator, the way that experiments set up, it's kind of completely indistinguishable, really in effect and size, from the global consciousness project, right? You have lots and lots of people seemingly coming together in a kind of concerted, focused consciousness trying to affect this kind of random number generator. And in global consciousness project, and you get these hugely super significant figures, right? Whereas in the Higgs boson experiments, you've got all these physics coming together, spending millions of pounds or dollars, even, you know, building this kind of massive particle accelerator to try and find something which they think it exists, and all you get is a probabilistic outcome, right, that it exists and it's no more significant than the global consciousness project.

David Luke  40:50  
So I'm not sure where I was gonna leave that point there.

Daniel Pinchbeck  40:56  
What about you know, you were talking about, kind of the positive ecological and psychological and psychological effects of psychedelics, then we have, you know, I mean, it's almost becomes, you know, certain ways of discussing psychedelics have now kind of, you know, forged these kind of, like tracks in the collective psyche, like, you know, DMT, you know, like, if you smoke at N DMT or have a direct experience of it, the experience is so incredibly alien that, yeah, how do you how do you know, what do you think about that? Do you think there's any evidence that suggests many people talk about having a sense of there being entities or, you know, other dimensional realities? I mean, is it just the wiring of the brain being, you know, totally reconnected, or a switchboard shifted, or, you know, is there any evidence that there might be some, some other, you know, sort of hyper dimensional reality that we, that we connect to in these states?

David Luke  41:51  
Well, I think the question of DMT is, is super interesting, and that one in particular, because it's the one most reliable at giving people encounter experiences with with some kind of sentient entity, which they believe most of the time to be some kind of real encounter. There isn't been enough research done on it, like I say, for all the reasons pointed out before that. You know, the scientific endeavor only looks to kind of bootstrap its own belief systems by researching things it can explain with neuroscience, right? So, you know, there hasn't been much, oh, virtually any research looking into the nature of these DMT entities. Most of the data is coming from Psychonauts and and we see there are certain commonalities, you know, certain people tend to encounter, you know, like the elves for one, are quite common. Or these kind of totally dispassionate beings, which are kind of doing some kind of neuro anatomy experiments on people and extracting their emotions. That seems to be a pretty common meme as well, but we can't ever really separate out the cultural influences, you know, in in kind of examining this, this huge data of phenomenology. But I think there are commonalities, and I think they need to be explored, really, in a more kind of concerted way. And what I will say is, you know, some data came out of Johns Hopkins this year. Last year showed that of people having entity encounter, experiences with with DMT, of those who were atheists prior to their experience, less than half of them were still atheist after their experience. So they, you know, that they're deeply, profoundly world changing experiences. We tend to lead people to believe that there is some kind of genuine other there, and it's, you know, it's going to be a tricky kind of sticky wrestling match with science to try and kind of bring out any kind of empirical validity on the ontology of these beings, I think, but it's worth the rest of

Daniel Pinchbeck  43:47  
David, I know, in the book on extraordinary experience, you were also talking about how you could envision there being in the future, some type of research institute into into consciousness itself. I mean, that's something that really fascinates me. And I think maybe with everything that's happening, and the sense of also the ecological kind of doom cloud up ahead, you know, maybe it's time to accelerate that, you know, and actually bring that into manifestation. How would you, how would you construct such a thing? Do you think it's possible that we could, you know, have our kind of Hogwarts, or, you know, consciousness, you know, deep diving, you know, what would that consist of? What type of research would you want to see done?

David Luke  44:28  
Yeah, I think I totally can. Thanks for that question, Daniel. And I think, you know, we have to bring together all the kind of perspectives on it, you know, so it can't just be a purely kind science medical model led endeavor, I think we need psychiatrists and psychotherapists and psychopharmacologists for what we can learn about, you know, the brain and all that kind of part of the jigsaw puzzle. But we also need to bring people from kind of wisdom traditions in as well. So, you know, kind of people from cultures like the we Charlie, you know about 1000s of years of shamanic practice with we. Substances like Peyote and and kind of really bring these together in one kind of melting pot, and also kind of wisdom twisted relations, you know, from from the East as well. So I think that's what they'd have to look like. And I think moving forward, like, you know, if Psilocybin and other substances are going to get licensed pretty much soon, for for treatment, for depression and so on and so forth. We're going to need people who are more savvy with the kind of Transpersonal kind of experiences that end of the spectrum. Don't just mean mystical experiences, but I mean experiences of telepathy, entity, encounters out of body, experiences, all these kind of things. People are going to have to have some kind of better understanding of these experiences. And I don't think we can leave that to psychiatrists and neuroscientists really, to kind of just deal with, you know. And I think people like shamans or Tibetan Buddhist monks and people like that need we all need to sit around the table together. So we need to kind of a completely multi national, multi disciplinary kind of center where we can all share ideas and exchange.

Daniel Pinchbeck  46:09  
I was hoping, I hoping he'll still pop up. But one of the people I'd invited to speak today, and who was on a roster, Sergio Magana, who is a nawadal Shaman, I don't know if you know his work at all. He works in the dream, you know, kind of the dream, kind of practices of the Aztecs. And he wrote a book called The age of the six son, where he kind of, you know, cuz I written the book on 2012 and then, you know, people were like, Oh, the world didn't end in 2012 and I was like, Well, I never said it was gonna end in 2012 you know. But we're clearly in some type of shift, you know, Sergio Magana perspective, and obviously this is not a scientifically verifiable idea, is that we are in a transition from the fifth sun to the sixth Sun, which, in the, you know, Mesoamerican cosmology, is a shift from a son of light to son of darkness. The son of light, for them, is a period of fascination with material, technology, rationality, science, logic. As you move into the sun of darkness, it becomes more of. The psyche becomes more predominant. The dream world becomes more predominant. Reality becomes more like a waking dream. And I feel that I find this a very fascinating notion. I'm kind of curious how it resonates with you. I also kind of, in a way, correlate it with the accelerating or, you know, kind of popularity of psychedelics, and a sense that many more people are kind of opening these doorways in different ways right now, and maybe that's somehow having a kind of effect, you know, on the collective psyche that's happening in a way that you know is unpredictable. I don't know what your thoughts on that? I just thought, and maybe Christopher has some ideas on that too.

David Luke  47:53  
Yeah, I'll just jump in. I would say, yeah. I mean, for sure, this kind of revival of psychedelic interest is going to have an effect on the collective consciousness, certainly in the West, where it seems to be happening first and foremost. But, and I think, I think it can only be a good thing if we reconnect with this kind of more dreamy, associative kind of region of our brain, get into the mythological and the unconscious kind of side of things, you know, as Ian McGilchrist is has kind of very neatly, kind of described in his book

Daniel Pinchbeck  48:24  
The Master only in McGilchrist idea, for those who don't know it.

David Luke  48:28  
So you know the idea of when it kind of takes a kind of more poetic than literal stance. But also, back to some science on the nature of the left brain and the right brain. The left brain being the kind of the literal, logical, linear, linguistic kind of approach to reality and experience, and the right brain being more this kind of dreamlike, associative, mythological, you know, endeavor, right? So, and that, that we've confused the master with the emissary, right? The emissary is the left brain, the bit that is all the communicating, the mouth, you know, the language, and we've got to the point where the emissary the left brain thinks it's the master, you know, we are kind of so heavily skewed towards this kind of logical, linear, linguistic mode of of being in the developed world that we've completely ignored the dream Time, the imagination, the associative thinking, the mythological to our to our peril, right? You know, it's like, kind of our intelligence has outstripped our wisdom in many ways, and this is kind of bringing us to this kind of cataclysmic point, right, this kind of moment of crisis. And so we can it really help us, I think, to flip that back over and get these two things in balance. And I think, yeah, I think psychedelics have a big role to play in that. And I think also the internet and things like that. The danger is with the internet, though it's, you can think of it as kind of like the news sphere, and it's kind of like a kind of technological bootstrapping for our own kind of clairvoyant telepathic abilities, right? You know, we can fake it till we make it. With with kind of telecommunications and the internet, and then we've probably come to realize that we can do all that anyway, hopefully. But meanwhile, we're going to sifting through an ocean of detritus, of misinformation. I'll let Chris jump in. Yeah.

Chris Bache  50:17  
I think the analogy that I use for this in Dark Knight early dawn is the analogy of the daytime sky and the nighttime sky. We are like a culture that basically head of the rule that we have to be behind closed doors by the time the sun goes down, and we're not allowed to get out until the sun is up. So our entire known world is from the nearby, close at hand, brilliantly illuminated, Sun soaked world, but think if we were a culture like this, we've missed the night sky. We just don't see the far away, the greater context, and so we don't have we can't answer questions of cosmology. We can't answer questions of origin, because this is the types of questions that require the depth, which are available only in the deepest levels of consciousness, where we can actually experience the consciousness of the universe, which we have come to, which we are appreciating in the physical world. But everything which is physical has a conscious dimension to it, and so I think that this balancing out seeing the nighttime sky of consciousness really will have a huge impact on a rebalancing of our of our worldview.

Daniel Pinchbeck  51:30  
David, I'm curious also, what kind of, from your research, you know, what would you offer people in terms of, you know, kind of practical advice? I mean, do you think it's kind of the right time for people to explore these alternative dimensions of consciousness through entheogens? Do you think there are dangers in them? I guess another, another question for you, which could be part of the same question, is there a Do you Do you also recognize a dark side for both of you actually in psychedelic exploration, you know? Yeah, so, so curious to hear what you

David Luke  52:07  
say, I'd say, you know, I think it's down to the individual to determine whether it's right for them. I don't necessarily think psychedelics offer a map for everybody. I think they can help a lot of people in lots of different ways and but they're not necessarily suited to everybody. And, you know, I could talk more about that, but I think there are many ways to get there. They can be a kind of good door opener, you know, they kind of just smash the door right off its hinges and show you the other side. Or you could just kind of open it a bit more gingerly, perhaps by getting into your dreams, or lucid dreaming, meditation, yoga, practice, whatever it might be. So there are the other techniques to get you there as well, which may be a bit more controlled. But you know, in this fast paced 21st Century existence, a lot of people have got themselves into a very sticky rut for all kinds of reasons, urbanization, 21st Century, living, etc. I think they can be a good Fast Track door opener for many people. But is there a dark side? I think potentially, that there can be, not just in how these things are distributed or experienced, but in terms of the experience. I think that's where you're going to, Daniel, in terms of the experiences that people have, or more about the kind of community around the use of psychedelics, are the

Daniel Pinchbeck  53:24  
experiences that people have, and even if you know, they can have negative, negative, positive effects on people's character, but are there cases where they start to have a very negative effect also, yeah.

David Luke  53:33  
I mean, I certainly can do and it's not all light. And I think, you know, I think you maybe have to look at it as more of a process. I mean, certainly from the clinical work that's been done. You know, very few people, a lot of people, may have challenging experiences, which, you know, they're very difficult for them, but they usually pass through them, and those are the ones that typically give, like, a lot of insight, and that people feel they grow more from, even though it wasn't particularly pleasant. And a very few people have, you know, kind of somewhat in the Division of traumatic experiences and and regret doing doing in the first place. So maybe either there shouldn't be taking psychedelics, or psychedelics are not necessary for them, or they started a process which, which kind of a process which, which threw up too much stuff for them to be able to immediately deal with. I haven't really got a clear answer for that, but you know that there can be heavy, dark experiences besides when you go into the shadow, when you turn up the volume on the mirror, you're not necessarily always going to like what you see in there. So yeah, and also the problems of spiritual bypass and potential narcissism and things like that which, which kind of may arise as part of the journey, but this is a part of any kind of like journey of personal or spiritual development, and not just with psychedelics, I would say, I'll hand over to Chris.

Chris Bache  54:53  
I completely agree with you. That's David. That's there are dark experiences that serve. In these states, and therefore you have to be well prepared. You have to fasten your seat belt, you have to choose a very careful location work with all all the safety precautions. My experience has been that all these dark experiences are some form of purification and clarification. And in my experiences, I found that the deepest breakthroughs into ecstatic knowledge, ecstatic knowing and visionary knowing, came after the deepest purification, dark experiences, so that in my work, I actually created the conditions that would facilitate the deepest and darkest encounters, not because I was fond of suffering, but because I was fond of what took place on the other side, would lay on the other side of that suffering. But to do that, it's really important to take psychedelics in a very, very carefully structured setting, not in a recreational setting, not casually, with a lot of forethought and lot of discipline preparation, not only going into the session, but coming out of the session, for the integration process, for the retention process, for the encoding and eventually the debrief after your session is over, and a good, thorough debrief is actually a very good way to prevent problems that emerge in your subsequent sessions. So it's very important,

Daniel Pinchbeck  56:28  
I guess, Christopher, or actually, for both of you. Question for you is, you know, what are, what are things people can do to prepare what's the best way to prepare yourself for psychedelic experience? I mean, how do you approach these, these sessions? For yourself.

Chris Bache  56:43  
Well, in the southwestern in the Hopi Indians, they have a Kiva, right? It's a hole in the ground with a circle in the top, and you climb down with a ladder, and then they pull up the ladder, and you're completely isolated environment for the duration of the entire experience. And I always think of my work with psychedelics. I'm in a Kiva. I'm in a place that's completely isolated, protected. I'm with someone who's going to take care of my body. I'm not in a talking relationship. I'm in an highly internal, engaged relationship. I want to have clean contact, so I want to eliminate all outside influences. Now it's wonderful sometimes to take psychedelics and go into nature, and that's a wonderful experience. But when you're going deep into this, in facing the personal and collective and historical shadow that work is best done, I think in isolation, I do a lot of spiritual practice before and after a session, I take care of my body. I make sure my body is well tuned and relaxed and aligned before going into a session. Because when you're running in psychedelics, a very high dose psychedelics, your body is processing enormous quantities of energy. It's very, very demanding on your subtle energy system. And if you haven't been taking care of your subtle energy system well before your session, you're going to have more complications arising. So a lot of care for my body, a lot of care for my subtle energy system, a lot of spiritual practice beforehand, and then a very careful and sustained debrief after, afterwards. That's my approach. And David, yeah.

David Luke  58:24  
I mean, I guess it depends on the your level of experience, the context, what you hope to get from the experience. So, but always, you know, if you're inexperienced, do your homework. Make sure you know what it is you're taking all the kind of basics, you know, dosage, substance, purity, Where'd it come from? Do you trust the source? Set and setting. You know where you are, psychologically, physically with it, preparation and then integration afterwards, as Chris pointed out, but it needn't necessarily always be a 600 my deep dive increases process, which is brilliant, but you know, it could be, for instance, we've experimented with 100 mile low doses with top level scientists for creative insight, creative problem solving, on technical problems, and that, you know, they seem to be, which is a completely different agenda to a kind of completely deep philosophical, spiritual journey. And that kind of produced really good results. So it all really depends on the context of use, but, but you make sure you pay attention to the context your intentions, set, setting and substance preparation and integration.

Daniel Pinchbeck  59:31  
David, I know that England, and particularly the Imperial College, is now kind of the center, in a sense, of the sort of cutting edge of psychedelic kind of research. I wonder if you could tell people kind of what's going on there now, what's what's active, and what types of discoveries are being made.

David Luke  59:50  
So I'm kind of loosely affiliated to Imperial College, the psychic research center there. There haven't been too much going on recently because of lockdown. I think they're beginning to is. Zoom, kind of recruitment of participants for various studies, but some of it is clinical. So they've been looking at kind of Psilocybin for depression as part of a kind of a kind of global endeavor to help get Psilocybin kind of licensed as medicament for treating depression. But also, most of their focus is on the kind of neuro scientific, the neuro psychopharmacological research. So how do these substances work in the brain? And more importantly, what does it tell us about the nature of consciousness, from what we can discover about how these substances work in the brain? So some of the projects have been, you know, the loss of neuro imaging of MDMA, Psilocybin, LSD and Dimethyltryptamine. I'm working collaborating on the DMT study. We're looking to do kind of slow infusion, so taking people into kind of high dose breakthrough experiences over extended periods of time, and both exploring the neuroscience connected to that, but also the kind of the experience as well. So what comes out of those experiences? And one of the things as a parapsychologist, I'm looking to do with them there is explore kind of shared visionary experiences. For instance, can we get two people on DMT at the same time in a kind of prolonged state, in kind of side by side, by side, but separated in different kind of rooms, you know, so doing it at the same time, and kind of look at their brain activity, see if there's any kind of correlation which we wouldn't expect from if they did it at different times, but also in the kind of experiences that people have, is there some corollary of the experience of two people may have at the same time When, with the intention of having a shared journey. I mean, that takes us into kind of some pretty far out Transpersonal realms. But, uh, yeah, that's just to kind of tip the iceberg of the stuff that's going on there. They're doing a lot of really great research and survey work too, and working with retreat centers and all sorts,

Daniel Pinchbeck  1:01:59  
um, I'm tempted to ask both of you just It may sound like a funny question, but it's always on one's mind from your different personal psychedelic explorations, how do you what? What's your philosophy on what like the purpose of life is, and the purpose of argument experience?

David Luke  1:02:16  
Nice, small question, Chris, you want to go first?

Chris Bache  1:02:22  
Goodness? That's that is a large one. Hey, listen, the universe has been unfolding for 13.7 or so billion years. We don't see any evidence that it's going to be stopping for another 13 point 7 billion years. So I think all of our attempts to say what the purpose of life is will always be inadequate, given the enormity of the actual project of life. What we can see, what we can project, what we can extrapolate about the purpose may carry us a certain distance, but it won't take us through the entire process. So to me, Central is learning, loving, deeply experiencing, opening, learning and exploring and developing, expanding our capacities. Exploring, to me, exploring is really important, the purpose, one time within a deep encounter with this creative intelligence, this nameless, faceless intelligence that I was engaging and the topic of what the purpose of existence is, what is it all? And I was popping in and out between non being or the pure void and suddenly being. And by popping back and forth between being the universe and non being the primal void out of which the universe sprang. It really generated a question, what is the purpose of being? What is the purpose of existence? And this consciousness said to me, have we not learned anything? And it just shattered me. I just broke down and wept because and it just seemed like it was all about learning. I don't think there's an idea often that this consciousness is trying to learn something about itself. I don't think so so much that that doesn't persuade me, but that learning is central to the entire project seems to be really important.

Daniel Pinchbeck  1:04:20  
Okay, David, what you got for us?

David Luke  1:04:22  
Not that much. I mean, I guess the thing is, we are, we are on a quest for meaning, right? You know, what is the meaning of the nature of the universe is like? Well, that's a human endeavor to establish meaning. You know, I'm not sure all species necessarily try and try and find the meaning, right? But we are kind of lost in a way as well. You know, where we are like? I think our loss of meaning in a kind of materialist, reductionist universes has kind of led us into all kinds of difficult places. So I think the quest for meaning in itself is worthwhile endeavor, but ultimately it may be not say meaning. This, but pointless, because it might be just about the being, as Chris said, that is kind of really the important thing.

David Luke  1:05:08  
But I'm a bit confused. What do you think Angel?

Daniel Pinchbeck  1:05:18  
That's good question. I mean, I think, yeah, learning, creativity, expression, play. I don't think there's a necessity to it. And I do think, you know, meaning itself is a human, created term, you know, dreaming, experiencing, creating, discovering, loving, you know, maybe multiple purposes. We had a few questions about the value of micro dosing, and I was curious if you had a perspective on do you see that as a really helpful tool for people at this point in time?

David Luke  1:05:55  
I guess that might be for me, because Chris seems to be bit more in the macro dosing can either end of the spectrum. I think micro dosing may have potential. I don't think we have enough data yet. I mean, certainly there's a lot of kind of uncontrolled data, you know, like kind of from non placebo, randomized, controlled studies from the scientific perspective, saying that people feel like it's really beneficial for all kinds of things, for depression, inside creativity, all of that kind of stuff. There's very little research to say those experiences or that kind of outcome may be genuine. We don't know, right? It could be one massive placebo effect. But hey, if people think it's beneficial, then then that's might be good enough. I mean, again, most of my research, I focus more on low to high macro dosing, right? So I think there's potentially a room for micro dosing. There's some potentially dangers in it, and I think, and that is, it's just the kind of CO opting of psychedelics as just kind of mere psycho vitamins when they can do so much more, right? Fortunately, what I can gather from the research is a lot most people who microdose invariably end up accidentally macro dosing at some point, and you should get a surprise, and that might be beneficial.

Chris Bache  1:07:20  
Yeah, I'll leave that one in your hands, David, because I personally don't have a lot of experience with micro dosing, because when I have tried micro dosing with LSD, it was after years and years of working at these very high dose levels. But basically I found now that I really don't like LSD in my body. It's like I drove it so hard with these massive doses for so many years that my body developed kind of an allergy to it, and so it's just not good for me to use now, and I haven't used it for years, so I don't have much experience on micro dosing. I read the literature, and like you, there's a lot of anecdotal, positive literature, but there isn't as much scientific, good, solid literature on micro dosing. I'm sure it's coming along. And like you, I also think of that. That's a good phrase. What was it? Psychedelic, sort of psycho micro pill, a vitamin pill. It can do so much more.

Daniel Pinchbeck  1:08:22  
Yeah, later on in this session, we're going to have a presentation for my friend Andrew Camargo, who's been working very heavily with Santo Daime and the Ayahuasca tradition for many, many years. But I thought first, actually, if he, if he's up for it, has he disappeared on me. I was going to see if Jeremy Johnson wanted to give us a little bit of insight into the integral model. But he may have flown the coop for a second. Daniel, there you are. Jeremy. Okay, great. You want to jump in and give us a 10 Minute kind of overview of Gensler integral consciousness model,

Speaker 1  1:09:02  
sure, sure. Yes, yeah. Thank you, Daniel. And just been really enjoying today's presentations already. So some of you may already be familiar with integral theory. I know Rory has mentioned spiral dynamics a number of times in the context of like extinction, rebellion and so on. But I think when we're talking about the history of consciousness, I think a lot of this stuff can be very abstract and very detached, and we look at our own history, our own living history, from the distance of books, right? So when it comes to Gene gebsters work, he's sort of these foundational thinkers of integral theory and Ken Wilber, but GEP sir is very, very different from Wilber in the sense that he's not a developmentalist per se. And if anyone has engaged with his his writing. Writing on the topic, his writing is deeply phenomenological in that it's always encouraging us to explore and inquire our own experience of consciousness. We've been talking about the left and the right brain with McGilchrist and in many ways, GEP SIRs work is a kind of if you want to jump in and begin to explore the left and the right brain in your own phenomenology, then he's sort of a good guidebook towards that. Now, little bit of background with me. I'm an integral scholar and researcher. I've been working with the gene gebster Society for the past 10 years or so, planning to get my PhD work. Hopefully things go well at CIS as well. So it's good to see Christopher here and the PCC program. So yeah, gepzer presents us with a phenomenology of consciousness, very carefully looking at basically a kind of an archeology of meaning making, looking at particular works of art, forms of literature, the evolution of language and etymology, the meaning of certain words, and how, even in our language, right, even in our language has a kind of, how to put it, a processual movement from what we're talking about, sort of night time or side real dimensions of consciousness into the waking and he very carefully constructs a kind of descriptive process in which human consciousness has moved from these side, real nighttime Magic and mythical forms or structures into waking apolonic, discerning ratio oriented, as he says, um, sort of the secular age, so to speak. But there are gains and losses in this, right. And I think having a more nuanced and non linear approach to this that is also encouraging it, encouraging us to explore these modes of consciousness in ourselves can really help us make these things concrete rather than abstract, and really kind of come and become to live the magic and the mythic again, rather than to merely acknowledge them right to live in some capacity or have some contact with these earlier modes of consciousness. So for gepse, the challenge in our time is not so much to move to a next level as to presentiate and to open up the wealth and the history of our consciousness, different modes of time, cyclical forms of time and participatory cosmologies, bringing into contact that with the more rational and scientific and secular modes of thinking. And for gepse, the requirement for that isn't just to bring those modes of consciousness back, but to sort of facilitate and enable an equanimous and open enough what he calls it is the principle of diaphin 80, a clear enough consciousness to allow those different modes and structures to presentiate themselves in us and as a kind of a too long didn't read micro dose of geppser, the idea for integral consciousness is an intensification of clarity and the capacity to bring forth different modes of being in the world and being in time, including linear time, timelessness, rhythmic time, right? Cyclical cosmology, etc, bringing all of those things forward in the human being, to bring them forward at will, as if we were a kind of mercurial being that was both a living past and also, interestingly enough, his theory of time. We've been talking a little bit about temporics and transcending time and space. His theory of integral consciousness, to me, is very futuristic in a certain way, because it's talking about a way of being in the present, in which the poetics of the present is able to be both in the deep past and in the future. The future is latent in the present as a tangible experience, and there's a poetics of presence that we can engage in that allows that to kind of come forward. Yeah, somebody's mentioning Ancient Future. This is what I'm writing about in my next book called fragments of an integral futurism. Very much this idea that a lot of the future looks a lot like the past. And in some ways a poetic statement of this, because this is too short of a presentation to really get into the theoretical details. But a poetic statement of this would be when we do and ancestor work right when we are able to listen to the dead within us. This is not an abstract thing. When we are at our altars and we are working with our ancestors, they are present. GEP sir, was very sensitive to that, and I think his phenomenology of this integral future is. The capacity to listen to the unborn as well, somehow that the the long dead and the not yet born are present in us, and not as just a conceptual statement, but as a living communion. Right? How can we live like this in the present and also, how can we embrace a sense of the present, in which past, present and future intermingle with one another. And by doing so, obviously, you know, I think that would be a wonderful tool to to, or mode of being, an ontology to have right now, right where the past, present and future are collapsing into one another, right, just in terms of climate change and the modes of thinking that ecological thought require of us. It's an intensification of temporics. And I could get into all this other stuff, but I think that's Daniel. I think I summed it up,

Daniel Pinchbeck  1:15:53  
and we have Jyoti is coming on in a minute. She's only has a bit of time today. But I did want to quickly talk about the structures of consciousness that Jepson mentions, which I also talked about in my book 2012 the return of Quetzalcoatl. He has this idea that there are these, I guess. He identifies four structures of consciousness, and he talks about how each one reaches a crisis in which the only way forward is to go through a kind of mutation or transmutation, break into a new structure of consciousness about the the Aboriginal, the archaic, the tribal, or in the mental rational. And he kind of would say that we are at the at the end of this mental rational structure with a particular way of conceiving time and space, and that we've reached a point where the only way forward requires a kind of mutational break into a new form of consciousness. Maybe you want to, you know, kind of just, just delve into that for a few minutes, if you can sure, sure.

Speaker 1  1:16:52  
So yes, the context in which I read GEP sir about a decade ago was he sets up his book. And again, I was interested in integral theory, etc, and interested in cultural evolution. But his whole, the whole premise and thesis of that book and his work, is that the 20th century, in the 21st Century, he was a mid century thinker. He was born in 1905 he died in 1973 is that we are at a civilizational juncture point. There is tremendous destabilization and restructuration he lived through, obviously, the first half of the 20th century, seeing that firsthand, he was a European refugee, fleeing from one country to another during that time. But he posits this as the end of what he calls the mental, rational perspective age, and the opening up of the this integral structure of consciousness. And he basically said, Well, hey, look, I'm in the middle of a transformation. There's new arts, there's new sciences, there's breakdowns of different modes of being in the world, right? There's a civilizational collapse happening at the same time there's a civilizational opening. So gepzer is a very key thinker in this regard, in that he both lived through and was deeply sensitive and articulate of exactly, in my opinion, some of the deep themes that we're learning to let go of in terms of the mental world, right, the perspective of world, the modes of time, the relationship between subject and object, and Cartesianism is very much related to the mental rational. So again, like, if you want to really cohere the the culture that in some sense we are being, we are helping to die, right? We are help, we're assisting in its death process. I think epster is very helpful here, and that he was a poet, and so he really makes this something that we can phenomenologically explore in ourselves, in terms of our own embodiment in relation to time and space. But yes, there's, there's a general overall structure, just really quick, archaic magic, mythic, mental, integral. And each of these go through these leaps, and I can go into this.

Daniel Pinchbeck  1:19:01  
Let's maybe come back to that later and go into that, because it's a really great framing, also for thinking about some of the subjects that Christopher and David were speaking about. Yeah.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
